I:Kemper Financial Services Inc. , charging that program trading is ruining the stock market , cut off four big Wall Street firms from doing any of its stock-trading business . 
The move is the biggest salvo yet in the renewed outcry against program trading , with Kemper putting its money -- the millions of dollars in commissions it generates each year -- where its mouth is . 
The Kemper Corp. unit and other critics complain that program trading causes wild swings in stock prices , such as on Tuesday and on Oct. 13 and 16 , and has increased chances for market crashes . 
Over the past nine months , several firms , including discount broker Charles Schwab & Co. and Sears , Roebuck & Co. 's Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. unit , have attacked program trading as a major market evil . 
Several big securities firms backed off from program trading a few months after the 1987 crash . 
But most of them , led by Morgan Stanley & Co. , moved back in earlier this year . 
The most volatile form of program trading is index arbitrage -- the rapid-fire , computer-guided buying and selling of stocks offset with opposite trades in stock-index futures and options . 
The object is to capture profits from fleeting price discrepancies between the futures and options and the stocks themselves . 
Index arbitrage recently has accounted for about half of all program trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
Last month , program trading accounted for 20.9 million shares a day , or a record 13.8 % of the Big Board 's average daily volume . 
On Tuesday afternoon , Kemper told Bear , Stearns & Co. , General Electric Co. 's Kidder , Peabody & Co. unit , Morgan Stanley and Oppenheimer & Co. that it will no longer do business with them because of their commitment to index arbitrage , officials inside and outside these firms confirmed . 
Kemper officials declined to identify the firms but acknowledged a long-simmering dispute with four securities firms and said the list of brokers it wo n't do business with may be lengthened in the months ahead . 
`` We 've been opposed to '' index arbitrage `` for a long time , '' said Stephen B. Timbers , chief investment officer at Kemper , which manages $ 56 billion , including $ 8 billion of stocks . 
`` Index arbitrage does n't work , and it scares natural buyers '' of stock . 
While Mr. Timbers explained he 's `` not totally convinced index arbitrage changes the overall level of the stock market , '' he said that `` on an intraday basis , it has major effects . 
We 've talked to proponents of index arbitrage and told them to cool it because they 're ruining the market . 
They said , ` Too bad , ' so we finally said we 're not going to do business with them . '' 
Kemper also blasted the Big Board for ignoring the interests of individual and institutional holders . 
`` The New York Stock Exchange has vested interests '' in its big member securities firms `` that cloud its objectivity , '' Mr. Timbers said . 
`` It has never been interested in what we think . 
The Big Board also has a terrible communication problem with individual investors , '' he added . 
Small investors perceive that `` big operators '' dominate the market , said Thomas O'Hara , chairman of the National Association of Investors and head of the exchange 's Individual Investors Advisory Committee set up after the 1987 crash . 
`` The impression I 've got is they 'd love to do away with it { program trading } , but they { the exchange } ca n't do it , '' he said . 
Big Board Chairman John J. Phelan said in a recent interview that he has no inclination to eliminate program trading . 
He said the market 's volatility disturbs him , but that all the exchange can do is `` slow down the process '' by using its circuit breakers and shock absorbers . 
Mr. Timbers countered that `` the mere fact they put in circuit breakers is an admission of their problems . '' 
Morgan Stanley and Kidder Peabody , the two biggest program trading firms , staunchly defend their strategies . 
`` We continue to believe the position we 've taken is reasonable , '' a Morgan Stanley official said . 
`` We would stop index arbitrage when the market is under stress , and we have recently , '' he said , citing Oct. 13 and earlier this week . 
Michael Carpenter , president and chief executive officer at Kidder Peabody , said in a recent interview , `` We do n't think that index arbitrage has a negative impact on the market as a whole . '' 
According to Lawrence Eckenfelder , a securities industry analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. , `` Kemper is the first firm to make a major statement with program trading . '' 
He added that `` having just one firm do this is n't going to mean a hill of beans . 
But if this prompts others to consider the same thing , then it may become much more important . 
The following were among yesterday 's offerings and pricings in the U.S. and non-U.S. capital markets , with terms and syndicate manager , as compiled by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report : 
Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. -- $ 300 million ( redemption amount ) of zero-coupon convertible notes , also known as liquid yield option notes , due Nov. 1 , 2004 , priced at 308.32 to yield at maturity 8 % . 
The notes are zero-coupon securities and will not pay interest periodically . 
The size of the offering was increased from the originally planned $ 250 million ( redemption amount ) . 
The notes are convertible into common stock of Blockbuster Entertainment at $ 22.26 a share , representing a 12 % conversion premium over yesterday 's closing price . 
Rated Ba-3 by Moody 's Investors Service Inc. and single-B-plus by Standard & Poor 's Corp. , the issue will be sold through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets . 
Merrill Lynch & Co. -- $ 200 million of 8.4 % notes due Nov. 1 , 2019 , priced at 99.771 to yield 8.457 % . 
The issue , which is puttable back to the company Nov. 1 , 1994 , was priced at a spread of 70 basis points above the Treasury 's five-year note . 
Rated single-A-1 by Moody 's and single-A-plus by S&P , the noncallable issue will be sold through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets . 
Boise Cascade Corp. -- $ 150 million of 9.45 % debentures due 2009 , priced at 99.7 . 
ITT Financial Corp. -- $ 150 million of 8.35 % subordinated notes due Nov. 1 , 2004 , priced at 99.85 to yield 8.387 % . 
The noncallable issue , which is puttable back to the company Nov. 1 , 1994 , was priced at a spread of 62.5 basis points above the Treasury 's five-year note . 
Rated single-A-2 by Moody 's and single-A by S&P , the issue will be sold through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets . 
ITT Financial is a subsidiary of ITT Corp . 
Arco Chemical Co. -- $ 100 million of 9.35 % debentures due Nov. 1 , 2019 , priced at 98.518 to yield 9.50 % . 
Rated single-A-2 by Moody 's and single-A by S&P , the issue will be sold through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers Inc . 
Trinity River Authority , Texas -- $ 134.8 million of regional wastewater system improvement revenue bonds , Series 1989 , due 1992-2000 , 2009 and 2016 , through a Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. group . 
The bonds , insured and rated triple-a by Moody 's and S&P , were priced to yield from 6.30 % in 1992 to 7.25 % in 2016 . 
There are $ 46,245,000 of 7 % term bonds due 2009 , priced at 97 7\/8 to yield 7.20 % , and $ 64.9 million of 7.1 % term bonds due 2016 , priced at 98 1\/4 to yield 7.25 % . 
Serial bonds , which all carry 7 % coupons , are priced to yield from 6.30 % in 1992 to 7 % in 2000 . 
Beverly Hills , Calif. -- $ 116,385,000 of refunding certificates of participation ( civic center improvements project ) , due 1990-2004 , 2007 , 2016 and 2019 , tentatively priced by a Goldman , Sachs & Co. group to yield from 6 % in 1990 to 7.19 % in 2016 . 
Serial certificates yield to 7.10 % in 2004 . 
They are all priced at par . 
There are $ 12,915,000 of 7 % term certificates due 2007 , priced to yield 7.15 % . 
The $ 58.9 million of 7 % certificates due 2016 carry the issue 's high yield , priced at 97 3\/4 to yield 7.19 % . 
There are also $ 29 million of 6 3\/4 % certificates due 2019 , priced to yield 7.10 % . 
The bonds are rated single-A-1 by Moody 's and double-A-minus by S&P , according to the lead underwriter . 
Michigan -- $ 80 million of first general obligation bonds ( Series 1989 environmental protection program and recreation program ) , tentatively priced by a Shearson Lehman Hutton group to yield from 6 % for current interest bonds due 1990 to 7.25 % for convertible capital appreciation bonds . 
Environmental protection program current interest bonds are due 1995-1999 , 2005 and 2009 . 
They are tentatively priced to yield from 6.45 % in 1995 to 7.10 % in 2009 . 
The standard capital appreciation bonds in the issue , due 1998-2011 , yield to maturity from 6.70 % in 1998 to 7.10 % in 2009-2011 . 
The convertible capital appreciation bonds all yield 7.25 % to their respective conversion dates , when they become 7 1\/4 % current interest-bearing bonds until maturity . 
Convertible capital appreciation bonds with a final stated maturity of Nov. 15 , 2014 , convert Nov. 15 , 1999 . 
Convertible capital appreciation bonds with a final stated maturity of Nov. 15 , 2019 , convert Nov. 15 , 2004 . 
Recreation program current interest bonds are due 1990-1995 , and are priced to yield from 6 % in 1990 to 6.45 % in 1995 . 
All of the bonds are rated single-A-1 by Moody 's and double-A by S&P . 
Federal National Mortgage Association -- $ 300 million of Remic securities in 10 classes through Goldman Sachs . 
The issue is backed by Fannie Mae 9 % securitiess . 
The offering is Fannie Mae 's Series 1989-88 . 
Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd . ( Japan ) -- $ 300 million of 8 3\/4 % bonds due Nov. 17 , 1999 , priced at 101 3\/8 to yield 8.85 % less full fees annually , via Daiwa Europe Ltd . 
Guarantee by Industrial Bank of Japan . 
Fees 2 . 
European Investment Bank ( agency ) -- $ 150 million of 8 1\/2 % bonds due Nov. 22 , 1999 , priced at 99.75 to yield 8.54 % at reoffered price , via lead manager JP Morgan Securities Ltd . 
Nippon Meat Packers Inc . ( Japan ) -- $ 200 million of bonds due Nov. 9 , 1993 , with equity-purchase warrants , indicating a 3 7\/8 % coupon at par , via Yamaichi International Europe . 
Each $ 5,000 bond carries a warrant exercisable Nov. 24 , 1989 , through Oct. 29 , 1993 , to buy company shares at an expected premium of 2 1\/2 % to the closing share price when terms are fixed Oct. 31 . 
GMAC Canada Ltd . ( U.S. parent ) -- 150 million Canadian dollars of floating-rate notes due November 1996 , via Banque Paribas Capital Markets Ltd . 
Coupon , paid monthly , is one-month Canadian bankers acceptance rate . 
Guarantee by General Motors Acceptance Corp . 
Call at par after two years and thereafter at par every six months . 
Swedish Export Credit Corp. -- # 100 million of 12 % bonds due June 15 , 1994 , priced at 101 5\/8 to yield 12.39 % annually less full fees , via Samuel Montagu & Co . 
Fees 1 7\/8 . 
Skopbank ( Finland ) -- 10 billion yen of 5 3\/4 % bonds due Nov. 20 , 1992 , priced at 101 3\/8 to yield 5 3\/4 % less full fees , via IBJ International . 
Fees 1 3\/8 . 
Hokkaido Takushoku Bank ( Japan ) -- 300 million Swiss francs of notes and bonds due March 31 , 1994 , with fixed 0.375 % coupon at par via Swiss Bank Corp . 
Put option March 31 , 1992 , at 107 3\/4 to yield a fixed 3.52 % . 
The issue is in two parts : 200 million Swiss francs of privately placed notes , 100 million Swiss francs of publicly listed bonds . 
Indentical conditions for the two parts . 
Other terms to be fixed Nov. 1 . 
Kingdom of Morocco -- $ 208 million ( redemption amount ) of zero-coupon government trust certificates , with maturities stretching from May 15 , 1990 , to Nov. 15 , 1999 , priced at yields ranging from 8.23 % to 8.43 % . 
All the issues were priced at a spread of 37 basis points above the Treasury strips with similar maturities . 
Proceeds from the offering are about $ 160.4 million . 
Rated triple-A by Moody 's and S&P , the issue will be sold through underwriters led by BT Securities , a subsidiary of Bankers Trust New York Corp . 
At a time when Jon Levy should be planning the biggest spring season in his dress company 's 17 years , his work day is studded with intense moments of concern about one of his biggest customers , Campeau Corp . 
`` The dress business has always been a gamble , but it 's never been like this , '' says Mr. Levy , president of St. Gillian Group Ltd. , which has become a hot name thanks to a campaign of sexy TV commercials . 
Every day , Mr. Levy checks orders from Campeau department store chains , trying to guess if he will be paid . 
`` I 'm now monitoring every major account . '' 
Campeau , owner of such retailers as Bloomingdale 's , Bon Marche , and Jordan Marsh , sidestepped financial collapse last month after an emergency $ 250 million loan from Olympia & York Developments Ltd. , a Canadian developer and a major shareholder in Campeau . 
The need for the loan surprised many analysts and bond holders who had been told at the company 's annual meeting in July that there were n't any major problems ahead . 
The risk of doing business with Campeau 's Federated and Allied department store chains is about to increase greatly , not only for Mr. Levy but for hundreds of other small apparel makers , button suppliers , trucking firms and fabric houses . 
Next week , the country 's top designers and manufacturers will begin showing fashions for spring 1990 , the second most important selling season of the year . 
And as the applause dies down in showrooms along Seventh Avenue and Broadway , stylishly clad Campeau buyers will begin writing orders . 
Orders from Campeau retailers used to be cause for celebration . 
This is no longer true because of Campeau 's massive debt load . 
`` It 's all anybody wants to talk about , '' says Richard Posner , executive vice president for Credit Exchange Inc. , a leading credit service . 
`` People wonder what 's going to happen next . '' 
Many manufacturers are worried about being paid for merchandise already shipped to Campeau stores . 
But those dollars at risk pale in comparison to the investment required to make and ship spring goods to Campeau stores . 
`` The few million dollars I could lose today is nothing against what I could lose on the spring line , '' says Mr. Levy , who estimates that Campeau stores will sell $ 25 million worth of his clothes this year . 
`` I 'm buying fabric right now for clothes which I may not be paid for until April or May . 
What happens to me if Campeau collapses between now and then ? '' 
Some credit concerns , such as Bernard Sands Credit Consultants Inc. , have told clients not to ship anything to Federated or Allied stores on credit . 
`` This is especially true for spring merchandise , '' says Jim Rindos , credit manager at Bernard Sands . 
`` Campeau has too much debt . '' 
Other credit houses , such as Credit Exchange and Solo Credit Service Corp. , are suggesting that their clients study each order before shipping . 
`` Payments are good right now , but we are n't recommending any long-term lines of credit , '' says Richard Hastings , a retail credit analyst , referring to credit lines which make inventory purchases automatic . 
`` The Campeau situation is a little uncertain and very difficult to analyze . '' 
Because of those concerns , some manufacturers say they will ask for letters of credit before shipping spring merchandise . 
`` We 're being paid today , but we 're worried about tomorrow and will want '' letters of credit , says the sales director at one major dress maker who asked not to be identified . 
Howard Bloom , president of the dress firm Chetta B Inc. , says : `` It 's big time chaos today . 
I 'm going to ship and hope I get paid . 
If I need to ask for money up front later , I will . '' 
Carol Sanger , vice president , corporate communications at Campeau , says that all of the Federated and Allied chains are paying their bills in a timely manner . 
`` They continue to pay their bills and will do so , '' says Ms. Sanger . 
`` We 're confident we 'll be paying our bills for spring merchandise as well . '' 
Typically , manufacturers are paid 10 days after the month in which they ship . 
If goods are shipped to Bloomingdale 's between Oct. 1 and Oct. 20 , manufacturers expect to be paid by Nov. 10 . 
But manufacturers now buying fabric for spring season goods wo n't be paid until March , April or even May . 
Some in the market question whether Campeau will be in a position to pay bills at that time . 
`` Everybody is worried about the possibility of cancellations , '' says Kurt Barnard , publisher of Barnard 's Retail Marketing Report . 
`` The buyers who work for the various Campeau chains may lose their jobs . 
The stores they work for may be sold . 
What that will mean for manufacturers is anybody 's guess . '' 
Campeau 's financial situation is complicated by an estimated $ 1.23 billion in debt due next spring . 
This includes a working capital facility for Allied Stores of $ 350 million that matures March 15 , 1990 , and an $ 800 million bridge loan due April 30 , 1990 . 
The company has stated in recently filed financial documents that it anticipates refinancing its March 1990 payments . 
In recent months , numerous retailers have filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection , including Bonwit Teller , B. Altman & Co. , and Miller & Rhoads Inc . 
Those filings , plus the expected sale of a number of financially healthy chains , such as Saks Fifth Avenue , Marshall Field 's and Bloomingdale 's , have added to the anxiety . 
`` Right now , Federated owes us a considerable amount of money , '' says Morris Marmalstein , president of David Warren Enterprises , a major dress manufacturer . 
`` We expect they will be current with their debts by the end of the week , but we are considering asking them for letters of credit before we take more orders . '' 
Mr. Marmalstein adds that his company is now holding some goods in anticipation of being paid in full . 
`` It 's become a day-by-day business , '' he says . 
`` Business has never been this tough before . 
Not only does your product have to be excellent , but you also have to be able to collect . '' 
Other manufacturers are equally cautious . 
Bud Konheim , president of Nicole Miller Inc. , says his company is now shipping only to the flagship stores of the Federated and Allied chains . 
This limits his financial exposure , he says . 
`` The branches are just warmed over , empty halls , '' says Mr. Konheim . 
`` Why should I be part of that problem ? 
I 've got limited production , and I ca n't give it to underperformers . '' 
Campeau 's Ms. Sanger disputes Mr. Konheim 's comments . 
`` Many of the branches are very lucrative , '' she says . 
`` That 's just nonsense . '' 
As for Mr. Levy at St. Gillian , he says he will maintain his credit lines with the various Campeau stores unless they miss a payment . 
`` If they slip for 10 cents for 10 minutes , I 'll stop , '' he says . 
Bethlehem Steel Corp. , hammered by higher costs and lower shipments to key automotive and service-center customers , posted a 54 % drop in third-quarter profit . 
Separately , two more of the nation 's top steelmakers -- Armco Inc. and National Intergroup Inc. -- reported lower operating earnings in their steel businesses , marking what is generally believed to be the end of a two-year boom in the industry . 
Wall Street analysts expect the disappointing trend to continue into the fourth quarter and through at least the first two quarters of 1990 , when the industry will increasingly see the effect of price erosion in major product lines , such as rolled sheet used for cars , appliances and construction . 
`` It does n't bode well for coming quarters , '' said John Jacobson , who follows the steel industry for AUS Consultants . 
In fact , he thinks several steelmakers will report actual losses through the third quarter of 1990 . 
Bethlehem , the nation 's second largest steelmaker , earned $ 46.9 million , or 54 cents a share . 
The figures include $ 15 million in costs related to a blast furnace outage and $ 8 million in losses from unauthorized work outages at the company 's coal operations . 
In the year-ago period , Bethlehem earned $ 101.4 million , or $ 1.27 a share , including a $ 3.8 million gain from early retirement of debt . 
Third-quarter sales dropped 11 % to $ 1.27 billion from $ 1.43 billion a year ago . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Bethlehem shares rose 50 cents to $ 17.375 . 
Of all the major steelmakers , Bethlehem would seem to be the most vulnerable to a slowdown . 
It has n't diversified beyond steel , nor has it linked up with a joint venture partner to share costs and risks . 
However , in spite of the difficult industrywide environment of high cost and low volume , Bethlehem `` had pretty good earnings numbers , '' said Michelle Galanter Applebaum , an analyst with Salomon Brothers Inc . 
Ms. Applebaum had estimated third-quarter earnings of 55 cents a share , but said the losses for the unusual items were larger than expected . 
Still , Bethlehem 's core basic steel operations experienced a steep drop in operating profit to $ 58.6 million from $ 186.4 million a year ago , when the industry enjoyed strong demand and pricing . 
The company said its shipments declined as a result of a reduction in inventories by service centers , a lackluster automotive market and increasing competitive pressures in the construction market . 
At the same time , production costs , compared with a year ago , were boosted by higher raw material and employment costs , which resulted from the company 's new labor pact effective June 1 . 
`` We anticipate that steel market conditions will exhibit a further moderate decline in the fourth quarter as the automotive sector remains weak and customers continue to adjust inventories , '' said Bethlehem Chairman Walter F. Williams . 
He noted , however , that the company 's order entry has increased from the low levels of the early summer , following the end of labor negotiations . 
Armco , hampered by lower volume in its specialty steel business , said third-quarter net income dropped 8 % to $ 33 million , or 35 cents a share , from $ 36 million , or 39 cents a share in the year-ago quarter . 
Sales dropped to $ 441.1 million from $ 820.4 million , because the company no longer consolidates its Eastern Steel division , which is now a joint venture with Kawasaki Steel Corp . 
Along with reduced volume , analysts said the nation 's fifth largest steelmaker was hurt by holding higher-cost inventory when raw material costs of such key products as nickel dropped . 
Operating profit dropped 46 % in its specialty flat-rolled steel segment . 
Moreover , the company said higher sales and shipments to service centers from its Armco Steel Co. joint venture failed to offset weakness in the automotive market , higher production costs and a poorer product mix . 
Armco shares closed unchanged at $ 10.625 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
National Intergroup , which owns 50 % of the nation 's sixth largest steelmaker -- National Steel Corp. -- posted net income for the fiscal second-quarter of $ 8.6 million , or 33 cents a share , compared with a net loss of $ 50.3 million . 
Sales increased in the quarter ended Sept. 30 to $ 747.8 million from $ 623.5 million a year ago . 
The latest period includes gains of $ 9.1 million from early retirement of debt and tax loss carry-forward . 
Last year 's results were hurt by $ 41.3 million in restructuring charges . 
National Intergroup stock closed at $ 15 , unchanged in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
The company noted that its Fox-Meyer Drug Co. , Ben Franklin Stores Inc. and Permian Corp. operations showed improvements as a result of restructuring moves . 
However , its equity in the net income of National Steel declined to $ 6.3 million from $ 10.9 million as a result of softer demand and lost orders following prolonged labor talks and a threatened strike . 
National Intergroup is negotiating for the sale of its 50 % interest in National Steel to concentrate more fully on drug distribution operations . 
International Business Machines Corp. said it agreed to let Motorola Inc. participate in a semiconductor research project as part of its effort to bolster the U.S. semiconductor industry . 
IBM , which made the announcement at the dedication of a research center here , said it invited many other companies to participate as well , including some from Europe . 
Jack Kuehler , IBM 's president , said IBM is also considering letting other companies participate in additional semiconductor work but declined to be more specific . 
IBM , which said a year ago it was inviting companies to participate in some semiconductor work , has become far more open about its technology as it has tried to rally U.S. industry to head off the Japanese , who now dominate the market for dynamic random access memory chips . 
While IBM , Armonk , N.Y. , makes the bulk of the DRAMs it uses , it does n't make the equipment needed to produce those chips . 
And IBM worries that the Japanese will take over that equipment market , too , unless U.S. semiconductor companies produce enough memory chips here to keep U.S. equipment makers healthy . 
Failure of U.S. equipment makers , IBM fears , would leave it dependent on many of the Japanese companies that compete with it in other parts of the market . 
IBM also said it expects to benefit from the expertise that Motorola and other companies can bring to bear on the difficult problems involved in semiconductor manufacturing . 
IBM already participates in one industrywide effort to improve semiconductor-manufacturing techniques . 
IBM said it expects industrywide efforts to become prevalent because semiconductor manufacturing has become so expensive . 
A state-of-the-art plant cost $ 40 million in the mid-1970s but costs $ 500 million today because the technology is so complex . 
And IBM said it expects the costs to continue climbing . 
IBM , which said Motorola is paying just a nominal fee to cover the 21-month agreement , acknowledged some companies had turned down its invitation to join in . 
But it said that was mainly because the project may not bear fruit until the mid-1990s . 
IBM said it thought more companies would become interested as the project progresses . 
The project involving Motorola concerns a technique , called X-ray lithography , that figures to be crucial to future generations of memory chips . 
Currently , chips are produced by shining light through a mask to produce an image on the chip , much as a camera produces an image on film . 
But details on chips must now be extraordinarily fine , and the wavelengths of even ultraviolet light are long enough so that the images they draw may be too blurry -- much as someone using a wide paintbrush could produce a broad line but would have trouble painting a thin one . 
X-rays , by contrast , travel straighter and can be focused more tightly than light . 
X-rays have problems , too . 
They can make the masks brittle and can pass through material they 're not supposed to . 
But , assuming those problems can be overcome , they should allow for memory chips that could approach one billion bits of information -- 250 times as much as is contained in the four-megabit chips that are just reaching the market and a million times what was possible in the mid-1970s . 
Allied-Signal Aerospace Co. received a $ 65 million contract to outfit Continental Airlines ' 393 planes with the Bendix / King Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance System . 
The airborne system operates independent of ground-based radar systems , informing pilots of nearby aircraft , Allied-Signal said . 
The system also provides course-correction advisories . 
Allied-Signal is a unit of Allied-Signal Inc. , a manufacturer with interests in aerospace , automotive products and engineered materials . 
Continental Airlines is a unit of Texas Air Corp. , Houston . 
In a stunning shift in direction , Provigo Inc. said it will sell all its non-food operations to concentrate solely on its retail and wholesale grocery business . 
The non-food operations accounted for about 27 % of Provigo 's 7.38 billion Canadian dollars ( US$ 6.3 billion ) in sales in the latest fiscal year . 
In a related move , Pierre Lortie , chairman and chief executive , resigned . 
Mr. Lortie joined Provigo in 1985 and spearheaded the company 's drive to grow outside its traditional food business . 
He could n't be reached for comment . 
Bertin Nadeau , newly appointed chairman and interim chief executive of Provigo , would n't say if Mr. Lortie was asked to leave . 
`` Mr. Lortie felt less pertinent , '' Mr. Nadeau said , given the decision to dump Provigo 's non-food operations . 
`` At this stage it was felt I was perhaps more pertinent as chief executive . '' 
Mr. Nadeau also is chairman and chief executive of Unigesco Inc. , Provigo 's controlling shareholder . 
At a news conference , Mr. Nadeau said the sale of the three non-food businesses , which account for nearly half the company 's C$ 900 million in assets , should be completed in a `` matter of months . '' 
The three units are a nationwide pharmaceutical and health-products distributor , a small sporting-goods chain , and a combination catalog showroom and toy-store chain . 
Investors and analysts applauded the news . 
Provigo was the most active industrial stock on the Montreal Exchange , where it closed at C$ 9.75 ( US$ 8.32 ) , up 75 Canadian cents . 
`` I think it 's a pretty positive development , '' said Ross Cowan , a financial analyst with Levesque Beaubien Geoffrion Inc. , of the decision to concentrate on groceries . 
Mr. Lortie 's departure , while sudden , was seen as inevitable in light of the shift in strategy . 
`` The non-food operations were largely Mr. Lortie 's creation { and } his strategy did n't work , '' said Steven Holt , a financial analyst with Midland Doherty Ltd . 
Provigo 's profit record over the past two years tarnished the company 's and Mr. Lortie 's reputations . 
For the six months ended Aug. 12 , Provigo posted net income of C$ 6.5 million , or eight Canadian cents a share , compared with C$ 18.1 million , or 21 Canadian cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales were C$ 4.2 billion compared with C$ 3.7 billion . 
Last month , Canadian Bond Rating Service downgraded Provigo 's commercial paper and debentures because of its lackluster performance . 
Analysts are skeptical Provigo will be able to sell the non-food businesses as a group for at least book value , and are expecting write-downs . 
Mr. Nadeau said he could n't yet say if the sale prices would match book values . 
He said all three non-food operations are profitable . 
Mr. Nadeau said discussions are under way with potential purchasers of each of the units . 
He declined to confirm or deny reports that Provigo executive Henri Roy is trying to put together a management buy-out of the catalogue showroom unit . 
Mr. Roy could n't be reached . 
Yvon Bussieres was named senior executive vice president and chief operating officer of Provigo , a new position . 
Mr. Bussieres was president and chief operating officer of Provigo 's Quebec retail and wholesale grocery unit . 
Mr. Nadeau said he intends to remain Provigo 's chief executive only until the non-food businesses are sold , after a which a new chief executive will be named . 
Comments by Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan lent some support to the dollar , but the U.S. unit ended yesterday lower against most major currencies . 
Foreign-exchange dealers noted that the impact of the chairman 's remarks was slight and warned that the currency remains sensitive to developments on Wall Street . 
Traders said that Mr. Greenspan , whose statements are ordinarily cautious , was especially careful to avoid any jarring proclamations , with fears about equities still unnerving financial markets . 
Testifying before a panel of the House Banking Committee , Mr. Greenspan said the short-term value of the dollar on foreign-exchange markets is n't the primary policy focus of the central bank . 
`` Our essential focus is on domestic policy , '' Mr. Greenspan said , referring to the goals of price stability and a stable economy . 
In perhaps his most telling remark , Mr. Greenspan termed the current U.S. inflation rate of around 4.5 % as `` much too high to be ignored . '' 
He added , however , that inflation could be brought down `` close to zero '' without throwing the economy into a recession . 
Analysts viewed the chairman 's comments as an indication that the central bank is disinclined to ease monetary policy further in the near future . 
The dollar climbed immediately higher on news of Mr. Greenspan 's testimony , settling lower in later trade as dealers squared positions ahead of today 's preliminary report on third-quarter U.S. gross national product . 
In late New York trading yesterday , the dollar was quoted at 1.8353 marks , down from 1.8355 marks Tuesday , and at 141.52 yen , up from 141.45 yen late Tuesday . 
Sterling was quoted at $ 1.6145 , up from $ 1.6055 late Tuesday . 
In Tokyo Thursday , the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.60 yen , up from Wednesday 's Tokyo close of 141.55 yen . 
Many traders forecast a continuation of the market 's recent bearish trend and predict the U.S. currency will remain stuck in its relatively narrow ranges in the near term and then shift lower . 
But according to Doug Madison , a corporate trader with Bank of America in Los Angeles , a large number of short positions must first be corrected , spurring a temporary upswing , before the unit can turn lower . 
He predicts a downward move in dollar-mark trade and a less dramatic slip in dollar-yen , noting that there continues to be a large pool of Japanese investor interest in U.S. securities , which could provide a solid base for the dollar at around 140 yen . 
Market participants hope today 's GNP report will offer more substantial evidence on U.S. economic growth , although analysts are quick to point out that the figures may overstate the economy 's vigor . 
`` The ` r ' word is looming again , '' says one dealer , referring to persistent concern among some market analysts that the U.S. economy is heading toward a major slowdown if not a recession . 
Some dealers note that while the third-quarter figures may appear relatively bullish -- the market consensus calls for a 2.5 % annual growth rate , unchanged from the second-quarter rate -- it would take a significantly stronger figure to alter market perceptions that the economy is softening . 
Some analysts reckon that the next quarter 's figures will present a more accurate picture of the U.S. economy , showing a marked slowdown in a number of sectors , including housing starts and equities . 
On the Commodity Exchange in New York , gold for current delivery settled at $ 369.10 an ounce , down $ 1.10 . 
Estimated volume was a light 1.7 million ounces . 
In early trading in Hong Kong Thursday , gold was quoted at $ 368.24 an ounce . 
Lawrence Insurance Group Inc. said it acquired United Republic Reinsurance Co. , a Houston property and casualty reinsurance company , from United Savings Association of Texas for $ 28 million . 
Lawrence Insurance also sold 3.2 million of its shares for $ 7.125 each to its parent , Lawrence Group Inc . 
Lawrence Insurance , based in Albany , N.Y. , plans to use the $ 22.5 million in proceeds to help finance the acquisition of United Republic . 
By acquiring the shares , Lawrence Group increased its stake in Lawrence Insurance to 93.2 % from 91.2 % . 
Lawrence Insurance underwrites mostly primary insurance , a company spokesman said . 
A reinsurance company effectively insures insurance companies that wish to spread the risk of a particular policy . 
Lawrence Group also owns Lawrence Agency Corp. , Schenectady , N.Y. , an insurance agency and brokerage . 
Levi Strauss Associates Inc. , the closely held owner of Levi Strauss & Co. , said its fiscal third-quarter earnings jumped to $ 128.6 million from $ 31.3 million a year earlier , aided by a $ 69.8 million gain from the sale of stock in a Japanese subsidiary . 
The apparel holding company had sales in the quarter ended Aug. 27 of $ 1 billion , up 12 % from $ 908.8 million a year ago . 
The company said its quarterly results are now being publicly filed as the result of the formation earlier this year of employee stock investment plans . 
Wall Street would like UAL Corp. 's board to change its mind about keeping the company independent . 
But what happens next in the continuing takeover drama may depend more on the company 's two most powerful and fractious unions : the pilots and machinists . 
Some people familiar with the situation believe that the collapse of the previous $ 6.79 billion buy-out , if anything , may have strengthened the hands of these two labor groups . 
As a result , both may now have virtual veto power over any UAL transaction . 
One reason : banks -- likely to react to any new UAL deal with even more caution than the first time around -- probably will insist on labor harmony before they agree to put up cash for any new bid or even a less-ambitious recapitalization plan . 
`` United pilots have shown on a number of occasions they are willing and able to strike , '' said an executive at Fuji Bank , one of UAL 's large lenders . 
`` If you have both { labor } groups on strike , you 've got no revenue and that 's a very scary thing for a bank to be looking at . '' 
Just this past week , a leading Japanese bank asked for a meeting with the machinists ' union leaders to determine where the union would stand if another bid or recapitalization became possible . 
Another reason : Emboldened by their success in helping to scuttle the previous transaction , the machinists are likely to be more aggressive if a second buy-out attempt occurs . 
The two unions already had significant leverage simply because their employer has yet to settle with either on new contracts . 
That gives them both the threat of a strike and the ability to resist any wage concessions that may be necessary to make a transaction work . 
Thus , even investors who are pushing for the board to do a recapitalization that would pay shareholders a special dividend and possibly grant employees an ownership stake acknowledge that the unions are key . 
`` There 's less likelihood of creating and completing a transaction without the unions ' cooperation and wage concessions , '' said Richard Nye , of Baker , Nye Investments , a New York takeover stock-trader . 
Mr. Nye thinks the UAL board should be ousted if it does n't move soon to increase shareholder value . 
Both the pilots and machinists have made it clear that they intend to block any transaction they do n't like . 
`` The pilots will be involved in any transaction that takes place around here , '' pilot union chairman Frederick C. Dubinsky declared yesterday . 
But whether the pilots can team up with their longtime adversaries , the machinists , is another question . 
The pilots ' Mr. Dubinsky says his union would like majority ownership for employees . 
At the very least , the pilots want some form of control over the airline , perhaps through super-majority voting rights . 
On the other hand , the machinists have always opposed majority ownership in principle , saying they do n't think employees should be owners . 
Still , in recent days , machinists ' union leaders have shown some new flexibility . 
`` We may be able to reach a tradeoff where we can accommodate { the pilot union 's } concerns and ours , '' said Brian M. Freeman , the machinists ' financial adviser . 
Mr. Freeman said machinists ' union advisers plan to meet this week to try to draw up a blueprint for some form of recapitalization that could include a special dividend for shareholders , an employee stake and , perhaps , an equity investment by a friendly investor . 
If a compromise ca n't be reached , the pilots maintain they can do a transaction without the support of the machinists . 
But at this point , that may just be wishful thinking . 
The machinists lobbied heavily against the original bid from UAL pilots and management for the company . 
Their opposition helped scare off some Japanese banks . 
The pilots ' insistence on majority ownership also may make the idea of a recapitalization difficult to achieve . 
`` Who wants to be a public shareholder investing in a company controlled by the pilots ' union ? '' asks Candace Browning , an analyst at Wertheim Schroeder & Co . 
`` Who would the board be working for -- the public shareholders or the pilots ? '' she adds . 
Ms. Browning says she believes a recapitalization involving employee ownership would succeed only if the pilots relent on their demand for control . 
She also notes that even if the pilots accept a minority stake now , they still could come back at a later time and try to take control . 
Another possibility is for the pilots ' to team up with an outside investor who might try to force the ouster of the board through the solicitation of consents . 
In that way , the pilots may be able to force the board to approve a recapitalization that gives employees a majority stake , or to consider the labor-management group 's latest proposal . 
The group did n't make a formal offer , but instead told UAL 's advisers before the most-recent board meeting that it was working on a bid valued at between $ 225 and $ 240 a share . 
But again , they may need the help of the machinists . 
`` I think the dynamics of this situation are that something 's got to happen , '' said one official familiar with the situation . 
The board and UAL 's management , he says , `` ca n't go back '' to business as usual . 
`` The pilots wo n't let them . 
Delta Air Lines earnings soared 33 % to a record in the fiscal first quarter , bucking the industry trend toward declining profits . 
The Atlanta-based airline , the third largest in the U.S. , attributed the increase to higher passenger traffic , new international routes and reduced service by rival Eastern Airlines , which is in bankruptcy proceedings in the wake of a strike that began last spring . 
For the quarter ended Sept. 30 , Delta posted net income of $ 133.1 million , or $ 2.53 a share , up from $ 100 million , or $ 2.03 a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue rose 15 % to $ 2.17 billion from $ 1.89 billion . 
During the quarter , Delta issued 2.5 million shares of common stock to Swissair , and repurchased 1.1 million shares for use in a company employee stock ownership plan . 
`` The key to Delta 's record earnings continued to be excellent passenger revenue growth , '' said Thomas Roeck , chief financial officer . 
Passenger traffic jumped 14 % in the quarter , while profit per passenger grew 2 % . 
Delta has benefited more than other carriers from the weakness of Eastern Airlines , which shares the Atlanta hub . 
Although Eastern is back to about 80 % of its pre-strike schedule now , the Texas Air Corp. subsidiary was only beginning to get back on its feet during the quarter . 
Separately , America West Airlines , Phoenix , Ariz. , reported third-quarter profit jumped 45 % to $ 5.8 million , or 28 cents a share , from $ 4 million , or 24 cents a share , a year earlier . 
The latest results include a $ 2.6 million one-time payment from a `` foreign entity . '' 
America West would n't identify the entity , but said the payment was for the foreign company 's use of certain tax benefits in connection with America West plane purchases . 
Year-earlier results included an extraordinary gain of $ 1.6 million from a buy-back of convertible subordinated debentures . 
Revenue rose 21 % to $ 243.4 million from $ 201.2 million . 
For the nine months , America West posted earnings of $ 18.9 million , or 97 cents a share , compared with a loss of $ 9.7 million , or 74 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue rose 27 % to $ 715.1 million from $ 563.8 million . 
PAPERS : 
Thomson Corp. 's Globe & Mail newspaper in November will begin transmitting an experimental edition to selected subscribers ' facsimile machines . 
The four-page news summary will be aimed at readers outside Canada or in Canadian locations where the national daily is n't available on the day of publication . 
In the U.S. , the Hartford Courant has a facsimile edition and some other newspapers are considering the idea . 
WHO 'S NEWS : 
Michael T. Carr , advertising director of Playboy magazine , was named publisher of National Lampoon and Heavy Metal magazines , succeeding George Agoglia . 
It was the first management change since film-makers Daniel Grodnik and Tim Matheson took control of National Lampoon Inc. in March . 
They are looking for a new editor for National Lampoon and are trying to sell Heavy Metal . 
Columbia Savings & Loan Association , reeling from thrift-accounting changes mandated by Congress and the recent collapse of the junk-bond market , announced a loss for the third quarter of $ 226.3 million , or $ 11.57 a share . 
For the quarter a year ago , Columbia reported earnings of $ 16.3 million , or 37 cents a share . 
Total assets increased to $ 12.7 billion in the latest quarter from $ 12.4 billion a year earlier . 
The loss stems from $ 357.5 million of write-downs on Columbia 's $ 4.4 billion high-yield investment securities portfolio , which includes about $ 3.7 billion of junk bonds , $ 400 million of preferred stock , and Treasury securities . 
Columbia owes its spectacular growth in recent years to its junk-bond portfolio , the largest of any U.S. thrift . 
Much of Columbia 's junk-bond trading has been done through the high-yield department of its Beverly Hills neighbor , Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc . 
For the nine months , losses totaled $ 212 million , or $ 10.83 a share , compared with net income of $ 48.7 million , or $ 1.11 a share , a year earlier . 
The results include a $ 130.2 million write-down of the securities in the high-yield portfolio to the lower of their cost or market value . 
Columbia also added $ 227.3 million to reserves for losses on the portfolio , increasing general reserves to $ 300 million , or about 6.7 % of the total portfolio , as of Sept. 30 . 
On June 30 , loss reserves stood at $ 108.3 million . 
Thrift officials said the $ 300 million reserve will be adjusted quarterly and will reflect the rate of dispositions and market conditions . 
The adjustments result from the recently passed thrift-industry bailout legislation , which requires thrifts to divest all high-yield bond investments by 1994 . 
Previously , Columbia did n't have to adjust the book value of its junk-bond holdings to reflect declines in market prices , because it held the bonds as long-term investments . 
Because Columbia now must sell the bonds within five years , accounting rules require the thrift to value the bonds at the lower of cost or market prices . 
For its future strategy , Columbia officials said the thrift may branch out into commercial lending or managing outside investments , as well as beefing up more traditional thrift activities . 
The quarterly results also reflected $ 21.4 million in non-recurring losses from commercial real-estate activities in California . 
Thomas Spiegel , Columbia 's chairman , said in a statement that the thrift was `` disappointed '' by the effects of the accounting changes . 
But he said Columbia remains `` one of the most strongly capitalized thrifts in the industry , '' based on the economic value of its assets and tangible capital . 
Columbia announced the results after the close of the stock market . 
Its shares closed at $ 5.125 each in composite New York Stock Exchange trading , down 37.5 cents . 
The price of Columbia shares has been cut nearly in half since August , when they traded at about $ 10 , as investors apparently realized that the thrift would be forced to take a big write-down . 
The stock 's decline accelerated in the past two weeks , from a price of $ 8 a share on Oct. 9 . 
Columbia officials said they do n't know how quickly they will dispose of the thrift 's junk bonds , because federal regulations , such as those that would allow thrifts to continue holding the bonds in separately capitalized subsidiaries , have n't yet been completed . 
Columbia officials also said the thrift should n't face problems meeting regulatory capital requirements , despite the large reserves and write-downs and stiffer regulatory requirements that should be in place by year 's end . 
Its ratio of tangible equity to total assets as of Sept. 30 was 3.6 % , and total equity was $ 457.9 million . 
The thrift emphasized that it has a large portfolio of equity securities issued in connection with corporate restructurings and leveraged buy-outs , which has a book value of $ 90 million . 
Although many of the transactions related to those securities have n't been completed , Columbia said the ultimate gain on the sale of those assets will range from $ 200 million to $ 300 million . 
Columbia also has unrealized gains in its public equity securities portfolio of more than $ 70 million . 
David B. Hilder in New York contributed to this article . 
Anheuser-Busch Cos. said it plans to aggressively discount its major beer brands , setting the stage for a potentially bruising price war as the maturing industry 's growth continues to slow . 
Anheuser , the world 's largest brewer and U.S. market leader , has historically been reluctant to engage in price-cutting as a means of boosting sales volume . 
With the passing of the heady days of swelling industry sales , however , the once-sporadic and brief forays into discounting are becoming standard competitive weapons in the beer industry . 
Over the summer , Anheuser competitors offered more and deeper discounts than industry observers have seen for a long time . 
Some experts now predict Anheuser 's entry into the fray means near-term earnings trouble for all the industry players . 
The St. Louis company said major rivals , Philip Morris Co. 's Miller Brewing unit and Adolph Coors Co. `` have been following a policy of continuous and deep discounting for at least the past 18 months '' on their premium brands , pricing their product as much as 25 cents a 12-pack below Anheuser 's Budweiser label in many markets . 
Anheuser said it 's discounting policy basically would involve matching such moves by rivals on a market-by-market basis . 
Anheuser-Busch announced its plan at the same time it reported third-quarter net income rose a lower-than-anticipated 5.2 % to $ 238.3 million , or 83 cents a share , from $ 226.5 million , or 78 cents . 
Third-period sales were $ 2.49 billion , up from last year 's $ 2.34 billion . 
Anheuser said its new strategy -- started in some markets last month and expected to be applied soon in selected markets nationwide -- will mean lower-than-anticipated earnings for the last half of 1989 and for 1990 . 
The projection sent Anheuser shares plunging $ 4.375 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday . 
The stock closed at $ 38.50 on heavy volume of about 3.5 million shares . 
Shares of Coors , the company 's sole publicly traded major competitor , fell $ 1.50 apiece to $ 19.125 in national over-the-counter trading , apparently on investor concerns over potential fallout from the coming pricing struggle . 
Anheuser noted that `` beer industry sales volume is 1989 is following the trend that has characterized the last half of the '80s , with sales volume being essentially flat '' while consolidation creates fewer , bigger players . 
`` We can not permit a further slowing in our volume trend , '' Anheuser said , adding it will take `` appropriate competitive pricing actions to support our long-term market share growth strategy '' for the premium brands . 
Anheuser said it continues to hold to its earlier-announced goal of a 50 % U.S. market share by the mid-1990s . 
Beneath the tepid news-release jargon lies a powerful threat from the brewing giant , which last year accounted for about 41 % of all U.S. beer sales and is expected to see that grow to 42.5 % in the current year . 
`` Anheuser is the biggest guy in the bar , and he just decided to join in the barroom brawl , '' said Joseph J. Doyle , an analyst with Smith Barney , Harris Upham & Co . 
`` It 's going to get bloody . '' 
Jerry Steinman , publisher of Beer Marketers Insights , a trade newsletter , said Anheuser 's announcement means `` everybody else in the industry is going to have a difficult time reaching their profit objectives . '' 
Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. analyst George E. Thompson downplayed the importance of the announcement , and called any comparison between the coming beer-industry tiff and the seemingly unending `` cola wars , '' unwarranted . 
Mr. Thompson calls discounting `` a loser 's game for anyone without a dominant market share , '' and projected that Anheuser 's statement of intent could simply be a means of warning competitors to ease up on price-cutting or face a costly and fruitless battle . 
Mr. Thompson noted that the disappointing earnings , which fell five cents a share short of his own projections , contributed to the sell-off by an edgy and currently unforgiving investing public . 
But Smith Barney 's Mr. Doyle , who yesterday trimmed his 1990 Anheuser earnings projection to $ 2.95 a share from $ 3.10 , called the market 's reaction `` justified . '' 
While the third-quarter earnings were a `` moderate disappointment , '' he said , `` the real bad news is the intensity of price competition '' in the premium-beer sector . 
According to Mr. Steinman , the newsletter publisher , Anheuser 's market share is nearly twice that of its nearest competitor , Miller Brewing , which had a 21.2 % stake last year . 
It 's followed by Stroh Brewery Co. , which has agreed to sell its assets to Coors . 
Both Coors and Stroh have recently been ceding market share to Miller and Anheuser . 
Tokyo stocks closed easier for the second consecutive day , finishing at the intraday low on index-linked investment trust fund selling toward the end of the afternoon session . 
Stocks rose in London , but fell again in Frankfurt . 
Tokyo 's Nikkei index fell 84.15 points to 35442.40 . 
Trading was active . 
Volume on the first section was estimated at 1 billion shares , up from 914 million Tuesday . 
The Tokyo stock price index of first section issues was down 8.65 at 
In early trading in Tokyo Thursday , the Nikkei index rose 145.45 points to 35587.85 . 
On Wednesday , the market opened bullishly with high turnover , ignoring the volatility in New York stocks . 
But losers were spread in a broad range by the end of the session . 
A trader said that the more an issue gained recently , the sharper the loss sustained Wednesday . 
A trader at Yamaichi Securities said the market 's mood was undercut by the continuing fall of Nippon Telegraph & Telephone shares , which declined to their lowest level since the begining of this year . 
NTT lost 30,000 yen to 1,380,000 yen ( $ 9,756 ) . 
Some traders noted individual investors dumped NTT shares amid growing expectation for a division of the company as suggested by a recent government-sponsored panel . 
Dealers said they also took profits to reduce holdings in their own account at the end of the October transaction period . 
Among pharmaceutical shares , Chugai lost 60 yen to 2,290 yen ( $ 16.20 ) , and Mochida fell 150 to 4,290 . 
Other losing issues included Showa Shell , which fell 40 to 1,520 . 
Toyota Motor fell 40 to 2,680 . 
Sekisui House , which gained 150 Tuesday , lost 70 to 2640 . 
Daiwa House also ended easier , but Misawa Home was firmer . 
Pioneer Electronic and Sony , both of which dominated buying earlier this month , continued to fall Wednesday . 
Pioneer was down 90 at 5,810 , and Sony lost 40 to 8,550 , down 10 % from its record set Oct. 11 . 
London share prices closed modestly higher largely on technical factors , although the market was underpinned near the end of the session by Wall Street 's firmer trend . 
The Financial Times 100-share index finished at 2161.9 , up 12.6 points . 
The 30-share index ended 12.6 points higher at 1751.9 . 
Volume was thin at 374.6 million shares traded , down from 405.4 million Tuesday . 
Dealers said the market gained some late steam on a flurry of buying by market-makers looking at blue-chip issues and stocks viewed as oversold during the market 's recent downtrend . 
Outside what essentially amounted to a bookkeeping exercise , dealers said London dealings were largely dulled by the absence of active interest beyond the market-makers . 
The late buying was drawn into the London market , dealers added , after Wall Street showed signs of stability following its rocky opening . 
Stocks that suffered on the day were those with active U.S. operations , dealers noted . 
Among them were B.A.T Industries , which settled 6 pence a share lower at 753 ( $ 12.10 ) . 
Hanson , with 15 million shares traded , closed 2.5 lower at 212.5 . 
Dealers said the shares were hit by fears of a slowdown in the U.S. economy . 
Cable & Wireless benefited from a market squeeze , bouncing 13 to 498 in moderately active volume . 
Jaguar was boosted 21 to 715 on follow-through buying after Ford Motor 's announcement Tuesday that it might be prepared to mount a full bid for the U.K. luxury auto maker . 
It was further helped by Ford , which announced after London 's close that it had raised its stake to 12 % from just under 11 % on Tuesday . 
Frankfurt prices closed sharply lower in thin dealings , hurt by the roller-coaster session on Wall Street Tuesday and worries about wage demands by the largest West German trade union . 
The German stock index tumbled 26.29 to end at 
`` It was dead , listless , depressing and negative , '' said one trader at a U.S. bank in Frankfurt . 
`` There was little turnover and nothing to stimulate the market . '' 
Equities tumbled at the opening as Tuesday 's gyrations on Wall Street , where the Dow Jones Industrial Average recovered most of an 80-point loss , fueled fears of another stock market crash , brokers said . 
Tough talk from trade union officials at the conference of the powerful IG Metall metals worker union in West Berlin raised the specter of nationwide strikes next spring , they said . 
For the 1990 wage negotiations , the IG Metall is demanding a further cut in the German workweek and steep wage increases , which could sharply increase the costs for German industry . 
`` All the positive figures on the economy are out already , and people are focusing more on the dangers for next year , mostly the wage talks and the { parliamentary } elections , '' the U.S. trader said . 
The market also shrugged off positive factors , such as higher bond prices and a slowdown in monetary growth in September , traders said . 
They said they expect the bearish mood to persist a while longer , as trading volume is falling toward the end of the year and the market is becoming more volatile . 
In the auto sector , Bayerische Motoren Werke plunged 14.5 marks to 529 marks ( $ 288 ) , Daimler-Benz dropped 10.5 to 700 , and Volkswagen slumped 9 to 435.5 . 
Continental gave up some of its recent gains , dropping 8 to 338 , as rumors of an impending takeover attempt for the tiremaker faded , brokers said . 
Deutsche Bank plummeted 12 to 645 , hurt by the general mood . 
Other banks were slightly more resilient , with Dresdner Bank shedding 4.8 to 320 , and Commerzbank slipping 2.5 to 
Meanwhile , Wall Street 's volatility unnerved investors in other markets . 
Share prices closed lower in Paris , Zurich , Brussels , Milan and Stockholm , and mixed in Amsterdam . 
Among Pacific markets , prices closed lower in Sydney , Seoul , Hong Kong , Manila , Singapore and Wellington . 
Trading in Taipei was suspended for a national holiday . 
Here are price trends on the world 's major stock markets , as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective , Geneva . 
To make them directly comparable , each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100 . 
The percentage change is since year-end . 
French chemicals group , Orkem S.A. , said Wednesday it has made a bid for control of Coates Brothers PLC , a British manufacturer of inks and polyester resins . 
State-controlled Orkem already owns 40.6 % of Coates . 
The remainder is held by the public and by family interests , a spokeswoman for the French group said . 
Orkem declined to give details of its offer , saying only that the bid will be submitted for approval by the board of the British company . 
The Democratic-controlled House , by a margin of 51 votes , failed to override President Bush 's veto of legislation renewing federal support of Medicaid abortions for poor women who are victims of rape and incest . 
The 231-191 roll call illustrates the limits of power a resurgent abortion-rights movement still faces . 
It continues to gain strength in the chamber but remains far short of the two-thirds majority required to prevail over Mr. Bush . 
Democrats voted to override by a 3-1 margin , but Republicans were equally firm in support of the president , who has threatened to make abortion a decisive issue on at least three separate fiscal 1990 spending bills . 
Yesterday 's vote dealt with the largest of these bills , an estimated $ 156.7 billion measure funding the departments of Labor , Education , and Health and Human Services . 
To gain more leverage , abortion-rights advocates may seek to fold the bill into an omnibus continuing resolution next month . 
But the stark numbers yesterday -- when 282 votes were needed -- indicate the president is in a commanding position for at least this year . 
`` Unless he changes , they lose , '' said a Democratic leadership aide . 
The action came as Congress sent to the president last night a stopgap spending bill to keep the government operating through Nov. 15 and provide $ 2.85 billion in emergency funds to assist in the recovery from Hurricane Hugo and the California earthquake . 
By a lopsided 97-1 margin , the Senate approved the measure after attaching further provisions sought by the influential California delegation and , despite reservations , the House adopted the bill on a 303-107 roll call . 
The package is more than $ 1 billion above the recommendations of Budget Director Richard Darman this week . 
But given the political importance of California , the administration was content to use its influence to prevent any Senate amendments adding further new appropriations . 
The $ 2.85 billion measure comes on top of $ 1.1 billion appropriated after Hugo struck the Carolinas and Caribbean last month , and these totals do n't reflect the additional benefit of low-interest disaster loans . 
The bill last night includes $ 500 million to help finance this credit and further raises the obligation ceiling for the Small Business Administration sixfold to $ 1.8 billion to accommodate the expected loan activity . 
In direct cash assistance , $ 1 billion is provided in federal highway construction funds , and $ 1.35 billion is divided between general emergency aid and a reserve to be available to the president to meet unanticipated costs from the two disasters . 
In the Senate , Majority Whip Alan Cranston used his position to win not only the expanded credit but also more generous treatment than the House had permitted in the distribution of highway funds in the next six months . 
The emergency assistance would n't be counted against a state 's normal allocation of annual highway funds , and the bill circumvents existing restrictions that otherwise would prevent the use of federal aid to repair a toll road , such as the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge damaged in last week 's earthquake . 
The underlying stopgap bill is the second required by Congress this fall and , since the current fiscal year began Oct. 1 , only the Energy and Interior departments are operating on permanent appropriations enacted into law . 
The standoff over abortion is certain to contribute to further delays and , apart from the health and education measure vetoed by Mr. Bush , bills funding the District of Columbia and the entire U.S. foreign-aid budget are in jeopardy because of related abortion or family-planning issues . 
The vote yesterday was the most partisan in many years , and though the Democratic leadership is ambivalent about how to address the abortion issue , the debate is increasingly measured in party terms . 
The 189 Democrats who supported the override yesterday compare with 175 who initially backed the rape-and-incest exemption two weeks ago and 136 last year on a similar vote . 
By comparison , Republicans have held closer to the anti-abortion movement . 
Only 42 GOP members opposed the president 's veto , a marginal increase over the vote two weeks ago and just 12 more than the 30 who supported the rape-and-incest exemption last year . 
At a recent White House meeting , Rep. Silvio Conte ( R. , Mass. ) , the ranking minority member of the House Appropriations Committee , argued with his friend Mr. Bush against a veto , and though Mr. Conte and Minority Leader Robert Michel of Illinois stood with the president yesterday , they are plainly uncomfortable with his position . 
`` This is n't a political issue , this is a moral issue , '' said Rep. Henry Hyde ( R. , Ill. ) , the most eloquent spokesman for the anti-abortion movement . 
But after years of using the issue for its benefit , the GOP finds its candidates on the defensive . 
New Jersey gubernatorial candidate Rep. James Florio pointedly returned from campaigning to vote against the president yesterday in contrast with his opponent , GOP Rep. James Courter , who has ardently supported abortion restrictions in the past but was absent . 
In an extraordinary mix of cultures and church-state powers , Rep. Robert Dornan ( R. , Calif . ) lectured his fellow Roman Catholics -- including Mr. Florio -- for having the `` chutzpah '' to disagree with the hierarchy of their church on abortion . 
Rep. Les AuCoin was as blunt on behalf of the abortion-rights movement . 
`` This may not make George Bush a one-term president , '' said the Oregon liberal , addressing the Republican side of the House . 
`` But if you support him over rape victims , this may be your last term . '' 
Separately , the House last night approved a nearly $ 67 billion compromise spending bill providing the first construction funds for the administration 's ambitious space station in fiscal 1990 and incorporating far-reaching provisions affecting the federal mortgage market . 
The current ceiling on home loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration would be increased to $ 124,875 , and the bill gives the Department of Housing and Urban Development new authority to facilitate the refinancing of subsidized loans for low-income homeowners . 
By a 325-92 margin , the Appropriations Committee leadership beat back an early challenge by House Banking Chairman Henry Gonzalez ( D. , Texas ) to the FHA provision . 
And on a closer 250-170 roll call , lawmakers upheld controversial agreements made by a House-Senate conference earmarking community development funds for more than 40 projects backed by often influential members . 
Rupert Murdoch acquired a 25 % stake in Grupo Zeta S.A. , the leading Spanish magazine and newspaper publisher said . 
The transaction called for Mr. Murdoch 's News International PLC , a unit of Australia-based News Corp. , to subscribe to a rights issue by Zeta valued at 6.65 billion pesetas ( $ 57 million ) . 
Also participating in the issue was Servifilm Spain Cinematografica S.A . 
The film producer , owned by Madrid-based financier Jacques Hachuel , received a 5 % stake in the Barcelona-based publishing group . 
The cash injection boosted Zeta 's capital more than four-fold , to 8.47 billion pesetas from 1.82 billion pesetas , greatly enhancing the group 's ability to make investments , Zeta officials said . 
Following its failure last month to win a license for one of Spain 's first three private television stations , Zeta is seeking investment opportunities in communications and publishing . 
With annual sales of about 30 billion pesetas , Zeta publishes over a dozen magazines , including the popular Tiempo , Interviu and Panorama , and three regional dailies . 
Chairman Antonio Asensio will retain a 70 % share in Zeta . 
The New York Stock Exchange is expected to launch its own program trading vehicle today , just as controversy over this trading strategy heats up . 
The Big Board this morning plans to begin trading its Exchange Stock Portfolio `` basket '' product , the first program-trading vehicle carrying the exchange 's seal of approval . 
ESPs will allow institutional investors to buy or sell all 500 stocks in Standard & Poor 's index in a single trade of a minimum of $ 5 million . 
`` Customized '' baskets of fewer stocks will also be available . 
The Securities and Exchange Commission gave provisional six-month approval to the Big Board basket at a meeting late yesterday . 
The SEC at the same time approved a similar but smaller basket product on the Chicago Board Options Exchange , where the minimum will be $ 1.7 million . 
Also approved was a plan to trade stock portfolios by computer after regular hours on the Midwest Stock Exchange . 
The basket products are `` an evolutionary step '' in solving problems in trading big blocks of stock that came to light in the 1987 market crash , said SEC Commissioner Joseph Grundfest . 
New SEC Chairman Richard Breeden , overseeing his first public meeting , said there have been concerns that the Big Board 's basket could attract investors with a `` short-term perspective '' who would rapidly turn over the product , thus increasing volatility . 
But Richard Ketchum , the SEC 's market regulation chief , said he did n't believe `` this will spawn dramatic new program-trading strategies that will be destabilizing . '' 
The baskets on the Big Board and CBOE -- which involve the actual S&P stocks , unlike the stock-index contracts currently traded on the Chicago futures markets , and index options on the CBOE -- will begin trading as critics step up their attacks on program trading and its contributions to the stock market 's wild price swings . 
The Big Board argues that its new product will help rather than hurt the situation by possibly drawing business from more-volatile forms of program trading . 
ESPs are also an attempt by the Big Board to head off the exodus of program trading business to overseas markets such as London . 
Big Board officials also hope Japanese investors will become interested in the exchange 's product . 
Already , many of the Big Board 's own floor traders are warning that the ESP baskets are risky and not in the best interests of the investing public . 
The 400-member Alliance of Floor Brokers said the new product , with the $ 5 million minimum , will benefit only big institutional investors and could lead to `` wild spasms of volatility . '' 
Stockbrokers who cater to individual investors said the Big Board 's new product confirms the exchange does n't want to curtail program trading , which last month accounted for a record 13.8 % of the exchange 's average daily volume . 
`` The New York Stock Exchange is losing its cool here , '' said James Andrews , head of institutional trading at Janney Montgomery Scott Inc. in Philadelphia . 
The new stock baskets `` are going to make it easier for program trading to be done . 
And it 's going to be done more frequently as the result of having more access to it at different places . '' 
Both the Big Board 's Exchange Stock Portfolio and the Chicago exchange 's Market Basket are designed for institutional investors . 
The Big Board lists its targets as pension plans , mutual fund managers and index-arbitrage traders . 
In index arbitrage , program traders buy and sell stocks and stock-index futures to profit from small price discrepancies between the markets . 
At the same time , only four securities firms have signed up with the Big Board to buy and sell ESPs as market makers , an unenthusiastic response . 
The market makers so far are CS First Boston Group 's First Boston Corp. unit , Morgan Stanley & Co. , PaineWebber Group Inc. and Salomon Inc. 's Salomon Brothers Inc. unit . 
Kidder , Peabody & Co. , a General Electric Co. unit that has become the biggest program trader along with Morgan Stanley , is n't a market maker , although the Big Board hopes that will change . 
Similarly , the Big Board hopes to entice Merrill Lynch & Co . 
Neither has plans to be a market maker for now . 
Traders said major securities firms are reluctant to become market makers because they fear the baskets may attract only limited trading . 
Big Board officials say only 25 contracts a day may trade at first , equivalent to a day 's action at a small , regional exchange . 
Even though the Big Board says its product represents a post-crash `` reform , '' some traders suggest that if the new basket had been trading during this month 's Friday the 13th market plunge , the Dow Jones Industrial Average might have dropped more than the 190 points it did . 
With the futures locked into a trading halt Oct. 13 and trading in some individual stock difficult , program traders would have undoubtedly fled to the basket system , the traders say . 
`` If we had the baskets , we would be leaving in caskets , '' one trader said . 
The SEC 's Mr. Breeden said the after-hours trading on the Midwest exchange would help the U.S. win back business that has moved overseas to conduct after-hours trades . 
Comprehensive Care Corp. , which has agreed to be acquired by closely held First Hospital Corp. , reported a $ 4.7 million loss for its Aug. 31 first quarter and said it is negotiating an extension of senior bank debt past its Oct. 18 due date . 
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange , Comprehensive Care shares plunged $ 3.625 to close at $ 4.75 on volume of 1,177,000 shares . 
The loss in Comprehensive Care 's latest quarter is equal to 46 cents a share . 
In the year-earlier quarter , Comprehensive Care earned $ 1.6 million , or 18 cents a share . 
Revenue in the latest quarter fell 17 % to $ 44 million from $ 53.2 million , the company said , reflecting poor utilization of the company 's facilities and its behavioral medicine contracts . 
Comprehensive Care shareholders have approved acquisition of the developer and operator of Care-Unit chemical dependency and psychiatric programs for about $ 58 million in cash , notes and stock of First Hospital , Norfolk , Va . 
The price was reduced last August from an indicated value of $ 76 million . 
Comprehensive Care said First Hospital had advised it that both bank debt and senior notes would be repaid after the acquisition , although it is n't assured the acquisition will be completed . 
If it is n't completed , Comprehensive Care said it would be `` required to promptly restructure its debt . '' 
First Hospital advised Comprehensive Care that an agent for the financial institutions providing financing of its acquisition is scheduled to make a final credit determination tomorrow , and that a favorable determination could result in a reorganization at Comprehensive Care `` by the end of October . '' 
Failure to win such a determination , however , would lead Comprehensive Care directors to `` consider various alternatives , '' Comprehensive Care said , without elaborating . 
Separately , First Hospital reported a 1.6 % rise in net income to $ 6.1 million for its year ended June 30 on a 27 % increase in revenue to $ 110.6 million . 
It said , however , that net income for the two-month period ended Aug. 31 plunged to $ 150,000 from $ 851,000 in the prior year on a 33 % rise in revenue to $ 21.4 million . 
A group including New York investors Douglas A. Kass and Anthony Pedone holds the equivalent of a 12.6 % stake in H.H. Robertson Co. 's common shares outstanding , according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission . 
Officials of Pittsburgh-based H.H. Robertson , which makes steel roofs , store fronts and building parts , declined comment . 
As reported last month , Mr. Kass said he was interested in making an offer to buy H.H. Robertson for $ 13 a share . 
In the SEC filing , the Kass-Pedone group said it intends to acquire additional H.H. Robertson shares `` with a view towards a possible change in control of the company . '' 
It has not , however , made a formal proposal . 
The group also is engaged in talks with third parties regarding obtaining financing to buy more shares , but no agreements have yet been reached , the filing said . 
The group controls 795,900 H.H. Robertson common shares , assuming exercise of an option it acquired from Executive Life Insurance Co. to buy 497,400 shares . 
Its stake includes 106,100 shares bought in the open market from Aug. 30 to Oct. 18 for $ 10.375 to $ 12.125 a share . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , H.H. Robertson closed at $ 11.625 , up 62.5 cents . 
After coming close to a partial settlement a year ago , shareholders who filed civil suits against Ivan F. Boesky and the partnerships he once controlled again are approaching an accord , people familiar with the case said . 
Meanwhile , within the next few weeks , the limited partners in Ivan F. Boesky & Co . L.P. are expected to reach a partial settlement with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. regarding the distribution of the $ 330 million in partnership assets , said one of the individuals . 
Under the terms of the settlement , the limited partners would drop their civil suits against Drexel , now pending in federal court in New York , another individual said . 
Attorneys involved in the talks said that the parties were closer to accord than they were a year ago , when reports of an imminent agreement circulated . 
One individual said the shareholders ' accord was `` well worked out . '' 
However , less optimistic attorneys warned that because of the tangle of numerous defendants and plaintiffs with overlapping claims , there is always the possibility that the talks will again fall apart . 
A shareholders ' accord would provide the first restitution to thousands of individuals and institutions claiming losses as a result of insider trading by Boesky & Co. , once the largest arbitrage fund in the U.S. . 
The plaintiffs are investors who bought and sold securities in which Mr. Boesky and his partnerships were dealing . 
Some claim they suffered losses because they sold while he was buying and others because they bought while he was selling . 
Stocks involved in the shareholder suits include Union Carbide , RJR Nabisco , American Natural Resources , Boise Cascade Corp. , General Foods Corp. , Houston Natural Gas and FMC Corp . 
There are at least 27 class-action shareholder suits that have been consolidated in federal court in New York under U.S. District Judge Milton Pollack . 
Among the defendants are Mr. Boesky ; the now-defunct Ivan F. Boesky & Co. ; Mr. Boesky 's main underwriter , Drexel Burnham ; and Cambrian & General Securities PLC , a British investment fund once controlled by Mr. Boesky . 
Individuals familiar with the negotiations said the partial settlement being negotiated would remove the Boesky partnership , the British fund and Mr. Boesky as defendants , while Drexel and other defendants would remain . 
Charles Davidow , of the Washington , D.C.-based law firm Wilmer , Cutler & Pickering , which represents Mr. Boesky in this matter , said only that `` discussions are under way . 
There are no agreements yet . '' 
It has been three years since Mr. Boesky , now in prison , agreed to pay a $ 100 million fine to settle the government 's charges that he had traded illegally using insider information . 
Out of this , the government set up a $ 50 million fund for plaintiffs who can prove their financial losses . 
According to William Orbe , an attorney at Grais & Richards , the escrow agents for the fund , as of Sept. 30 the fund amounted to $ 60.5 million . 
Separately , attorneys for the 42 or so limited partners have had serious discussions that could lead to the distribution of the partnership 's assets . 
The limited partners include insurance companies , financial institutions and individual investors . 
An agreement with Drexel regarding the limited partners ' investments is an essential step toward getting their money back . 
This is because a Delaware court earlier this year said that Drexel is entitled to get its money back before or at the same time as the limited partners . 
Drexel is owed $ 20 million by the partnership . 
An individual familiar with the negotiations said that whatever investments the limited partners do not recoup from the $ 330 million in partnership assets , they will receive from the $ 350 million restitution fund available as a result of Drexel 's settlement with the government in December 1988 . 
Drexel agreed to plead guilty to six felony counts and pay $ 650 million , of which $ 350 million was set aside for shareholders and other plaintiffs , including the limited partners , who claim they were injured by Drexel . 
JAILED AFRICAN-AMERICAN activist wins a battle against the 
U.S. District Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. ordered the FBI to immediately begin processing Herman Benjamin Ferguson 's request for documents stemming from the agency 's investigation of him during the 1960s . 
The FBI had said it would not be able to begin processing the request until June 
Mr. Ferguson , who is 68 years old , fled the U.S. in 1970 after exhausting his appeals of a 1968 conviction on conspiracy to murder . 
He turned himself in to authorities in New York earlier this year . 
He maintains that the information from the FBI will help him get his 1968 conviction vacated and his bail-jumping indictment dismissed . 
His attorneys claim he was framed by the FBI and New York police as part of a campaign to destroy the black liberation movement of the 1960s . 
Because the federal Freedom of Information Act was n't law at that time , the FBI was n't required to turn over information on its investigations when Mr. Ferguson appealed his conviction in the 1960s . 
But in federal court in Manhattan , Judge Patterson said the FBI records could show that Mr. Ferguson 's arrest was the result of questionable legal practices . 
The judge said that if the FBI 's proposed schedule was followed in releasing the documents , `` a delay of over one year will have occurred and plaintiff will have served approximately two-thirds of his 3 1 / 2-year minimum sentence by the time he receives the files . '' 
Gabriel W. Gorenstein , the assistant U.S. attorney handling the case for the FBI , said no decision has been made about appealing the judge 's ruling . 
FEDERAL COURTS URGED to cut costs and reduce delays of civil suits . 
The study , conducted by a task force of the Brookings Institution , suggests that Congress should require the courts to develop the plans . 
The study was initiated by Senate Judiciary Committee chairman Joseph Biden ( D. , Del . ) . 
The Washington , D.C. , think tank recommends that the courts adopt different `` tracks '' for different types of civil cases in order to separate the handling of highly complex suits from simpler ones . 
Complex cases , such as antitrust suits and many business disputes , would receive intense supervision by federal judges to keep pretrial proceedings moving . 
Standard cases would require less judicial attention , and fast-track cases could be resolved quickly . 
The study also said each federal court should set strict time limits for the pretrial exchange of documents and evidence , ranging from as much as 100 days for cases in the fast track to as much as 18 months for complex disputes . 
And the study said federal courts should set firm trial dates early in the process . 
To take advantage of local expertise and custom , the study said , Congress should require each of the 94 federal district courts to adopt its own plan to speed the handling of civil suits and to reduce the high costs in civil cases . 
Although some of the study 's recommendations resemble those of similar projects , the makeup of the task force was unusually diverse , adding significance to the effort . 
It included lawyers from civil rights and consumer groups , plaintiffs ' lawyers and defense attorneys , corporate counsel and law professors . 
Businessland Inc. said it purchased a major regional computer retailer , Data Systems Computer Centre Inc. , Springfield , New Jersey . 
Terms were n't disclosed . 
The purchase strengthens San Jose , Calif.-based Businessland 's links to the large corporations who are among the biggest buyers of computers . 
Data Systems has five retail stores in the northeast , but specializes in selling personal computers made by International Business Machines Corp. and Apple Computer Inc. to banks , brokerage firms and other big businesses based in the New York metropolitan area . 
John Fitzsimmons , chief executive officer of Data Systems , said the company was profitable and expected sales of nearly $ 100 million this year . 
He said Businessland , which operates stores in 50 U.S. metropolitan areas , planned to absorb his firm 's operations . 
Eastman Kodak Co. of Rochester , N.Y. , said its Lehn & Fink Products subsidiary was restructured to form two operating groups , one for household products such as cleaners and disinfectants and the other for do-it-yourself products such as wood finishes and stains . 
The Montvale , N.J. , unit said the new operating structure `` creates a more focused and responsive organization geared to effectively managing the size and scope of the unit 's current business . '' 
The consumer brands unit was absorbed by the photographic , pharmaceutical and chemical concern last year when it acquired Sterling Drug Inc . 
In a related matter , Peter Black , president of consumer brand Minwax , was named group vice president for the household products operating group . 
Kenneth M. Evans , president of Thompson & Formby brand , was named group vice president of the do-it-yourself operating group . 
Sotheby 's Holdings Inc. , the parent of the auction house Sotheby 's , said its net loss for the seasonally slow third quarter narrowed from a year earlier on a leap in operating revenue . 
The New York-based company reported a third-quarter net loss of $ 5.1 million , or 10 cents a share , compared with a year-earlier net loss of $ 6.2 million , or 12 cents a share . 
Operating revenue surged 54 % in the latest period to $ 42.9 million from $ 27.7 million . 
The company said 80 % of its auction business is usually conducted in the second and fourth quarters , with the current quarter having begun `` extremely well . 
West Texas Intermediate , the U.S. benchmark crude , seemed tethered again yesterday in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange . 
Widely expected to open 10 to 15 cents a barrel higher on the strength of statistics from the American Petroleum Institute , the December contract managed to start the session only eight cents higher . 
In the last hour of the trading day , December contract took a tumble to end the session 10 cents lower at $ 19.62 a barrel . 
And now that the price has fallen below $ 19.65 , which many had said showed considerable resistance , some traders and analysts figure there 's little to stop the price from going lower on technical decisions . 
With no petroleum-related news or changes in the fundamentals to dictate price moves , `` technicians are wanting to sell this stuff , '' said Eric Bolling of Edge Trading Corp . 
`` And short-term , the technicians may have their way . '' 
The market quickly discounted the weekly inventory report showing a 6.3 million barrel decrease in U.S. crude oil stocks as the legacy of Hurricane Jerry . 
That storm hit the Gulf Coast Oct. 13 , closing the Louisiana Offshore Oil Port for a time and preventing tankers from unloading . 
Next week 's report could very well show an increase in crude inventories . 
Dismissing the trade group 's numbers left traders plenty of time to worry anew about the latest reports on OPEC production . 
An AP-Dow Jones survey of integrated oil companies , independent refiners , and oil industry consultants indicates that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries increased its production to 22.2 million barrels a day in September . 
Estimates suggest October 's figure may be even higher . 
That level of production is n't of much concern as long as demand continues strong , analysts said . 
But the first quarter of the year is generally the weakest and OPEC production does n't seem to be slackening in anticipation of that . 
Also , maintaining current demand assumes no significant slowdown in world economies . 
To top off the bearish factors affecting yesterday 's trading , late October weather , especially in the Northeast U.S. , continues to be very moderate , leaving heating oil futures trading lackluster . 
`` We are n't seeing any cold weather here , '' Mr. Bolling said from New York . 
In other commodity markets yesterday : 
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS : 
Soybean and corn futures prices moved higher on the strength of buying from commodity pool managers trying to profit from technical price trends , as well as continued export strength . 
A leveling off of farmer selling tied to the harvest also removed some of the downward pressure on futures contract prices . 
Wheat futures prices fell , however , at least partly in reaction to the rumored selling of futures contracts equal to several million bushels of wheat by commodity speculator Richard Dennis . 
Neither Mr. Dennis nor officials of his Chicago trading company , C&D Commodities , could be reached for comment . 
As for corn and soybean futures , `` a lot of commission house buying this morning and computer-driven buying '' supported prices in early trading , said Steven Freed , a futures analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in Chicago . 
Soybean futures for November delivery gained 5.25 cents a bushel to close at $ 5.66 a bushel on the Chicago Board of Trade . 
December corn futures added 2.25 cents a bushel to close at $ 2.4225 a bushel on the Board of Trade . 
Announced and anticipated purchases from foreign countries are also supporting futures prices . 
`` Russian ships are arriving in the gulf and there is n't enough grain in the pipeline , '' said Katharina Zimmer , a futures analyst with Merrill Lynch & Co. in New York . 
The Soviet Union has purchased roughly eight million tons of grain this month , and is expected to take delivery by year end , analysts said . 
COTTON : 
Futures prices rose modestly , but trading volume was n't very heavy . 
The December contract settled at 73.97 cents a pound , up 0.59 cent , but it rose as high as 74.20 cents . 
Several cotton analysts said that the move appeared to be mostly technical . 
Traders who had sold contracts earlier , in hopes of buying them back at lower prices , yesterday were buying contracts back at higher prices to limit their losses . 
Floor traders also said that the market could have been helped by rumors , which have been circulating for the past two days , about China purchasing cotton . 
The rumor , which has been neither confirmed nor denied , has China buying 125,000 to 200,000 bales for near-term delivery . 
One floor trader said that if there were Chinese purchases , they should have had a bigger effect on the market . 
Another said that if China was a buyer , it would be the earliest that country had made purchases since the 1979-80 crop year , and thus would be a bullish sign . 
This trader characterized the recent price action as a contest between the fundamentalists , who see higher prices ahead , and the technicians , who are basically buying cotton toward the bottom of the current trading range , around 71 cents , and selling it when the price climbs more than 74 cents . 
This trader said that he thought the market would turn aggressively bullish from a technical standpoint if the December contract was able to exceed 75.75 cents . 
He also noted that stocks on Aug. 1 , 1990 , are currently projected at 3.3 million bales , the smallest end-of-season supply since 1985 . 
COCOA : 
The modest sell-off , which started on Tuesday , continued . 
The December contract ended at $ 999 a metric ton , down $ 15 . 
The market is drifting , at least partly , because of a lack of crop information out of Ghana and the Ivory Coast , the two largest African producers . 
Harry Schwartz , a soft commodity specialist for Cargill Investors Services in New York , said the only report Ghana has issued about the arrival of cocoa from the interior was for 7,839 metric tons as of Oct. 12 . 
By this time last year , he noted , arrivals totaling 33,270 tons had been announced . 
A similar situation apparently exists in the Ivory Coast with no figures released yet this year , compared with 55,000 tons as of this time a year ago . 
He said that if little cocoa actually has arrived at the ports , shipping delays could result . 
This is the worry that probably brought steadiness to the market earlier in the week , he said . 
There was also some fear that without Ivory Coast cocoa a large French cocoa merchant , Cie . Financiere Sucre et Denrees , might not be able to deliver cocoa against the contracts it had sold earlier for December delivery in London . 
However , the French merchant has about 200,000 tons of old crop Ivory Coast cocoa stored in the Netherlands from an agreement it had negotiated with the Ivory Coast last spring . 
Cargill thinks that even though the merchant has a contract stating that it wo n't bring this cocoa to market until after March 1991 , there is some evidence the contract has been modified . 
This modification , apparently , would permit the French merchant to deliver this cocoa , if necessary , against existing short positions . 
Richard D. Sutton , 64 years old , chairman of this bank-holding company , was named acting president and chief executive officer of the company and its First National Bank of Toms River subsidiary . 
Joseph W. Robertson , 61 , was dismissed from those posts , the company said . 
He could n't be reached and a company spokesman would n't comment on the dismissal . 
Mr. Robertson was also removed from the board of First National Bank of New Jersey-Salem County , another unit , and the Toms River bank . 
American Medical International Inc. said it has n't received any other offers to acquire the owner and operator of hospitals , and took another step toward completion of its $ 3 billion acquisition by IMA Holdings Corp . 
Earlier this month IMA , an investment group that includes Chicago 's Pritzker family and First Boston Corp. , submitted a reduced bid for American Medical after it could n't finance its initial offer . 
Under the new offer , IMA will pay $ 26.50 a share for 63 million shares , or about 86 % of the shares outstanding . 
IMA also will assume $ 1.4 billion in debt . 
Yesterday , in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , AMI common closed at $ 23.625 , up 12.5 cents , on volume of almost 1.8 million . 
Earlier , American Medical said it had been approached again by two other possible suitors , whom it would n't identify but who had previously submitted bids for the company . 
Yesterday , American Medical said that the two other parties told the company that they do n't have any current intention of making a takeover bid . 
American Medical said its directors have approved what is , in effect , a draft of a solvency opinion on the acquisition , submitted by the Los Angeles-based investment banking and evaluation consulting firm of Houlian Lokey Howard & Zukin Inc . 
A final opinion must be approved prior to the acceptance of tendered shares for payment under the offer , which was due to expire at 12:01 a.m. EDT today . 
Separately , Moody 's Investors Service Inc. downgraded the ratings of American Medical 's senior and subordinated debt issues and those of its international affiliate . 
The downgrade anticipates completion of the IMA Holdings acquisition today , Moody 's said . 
The ratings concern said the acquisition should result in pretax losses from operations because of increases in interest expense and charges for depreciation and amortization , but that it expects the losses to be reduced through productivity gains and above average growth of the company 's hospitals . 
Moody 's said the ratings anticipate a successful debt-reduction program and modest improvement in discretionary cash flow because of planned asset sales . 
Moody 's changes affected the following issues : 
American Medical International : Senior notes , sinking-fund debentures , Euromarket notes , Eurobonds , Swiss franc bonds , unsecured loan stock to Ba3 from Baa2 ; convertible subordinated debentures , notes , and sinking-fund debentures to B2 from Baa3 . 
American Medical International N.V. : Guaranteed Euroissues to Ba3 from Baa2 . 
An American Medical spokeswoman said the Moody 's downgrading was expected because of the nature of the takeover . 
Bay Financial Corp. , Boston , which has been reporting big losses and warning of a possible bankruptcy-law filing , said it was sued by a holder . 
The real estate investment trust said the `` purported class action suit , '' seeks `` damages and other remedies under federal securities law and state law . '' 
Gerald E. Wilson , corporate secretary and legal counsel , said the company would n't disclose further details . 
He declined to name the shareholder , the plaintiff 's lawyer or the court where the lawsuit was filed . 
Bay , which has substantial investments in the floundering Massachusetts market , reported a loss of $ 62 million , or $ 15.97 a share , for the fiscal year ended June 30 . 
It has said it might seek bankruptcy-court protection from creditor lawsuits if it ca n't renegotiate its borrowings . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Bay closed at $ 2.625 , down 25 cents . 
Keith A. Tucker was named a director of this insurance and financial services concern . 
Mr. Tucker , 44 years old , is president of Trivest Securities Corp. and senior vice president of Trivest Inc. , closely held investment companies based in Miami . 
His selection increases the size of the board to 12 members . 
Torchmark also said that Samuel E. Upchurch Jr. , 37 , vice president and general counsel , was selected to serve the remainder of the term vacated by John S.P. Samford , who resigned as director . 
Philip Morris Cos. , New York , adopted a defense measure designed to make a hostile takeover prohibitively expensive . 
The giant foods , tobacco and brewing company said it will issue common-share purchase rights to shareholders of record Nov. 8 . 
Under certain circumstances , the rights would entitle Philip Morris holders to buy shares of either the company or its acquirer for half price . 
The board is n't aware of any attempts to take over Philip Morris , the company said . 
As of Sept. 30 , Philip Morris had 926 million shares outstanding . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Philip Morris shares closed yesterday at $ 43.50 each , down $ 1 . 
Beghin-Say S.A. said that it plans to sell its remaining paper operations by the end of January as part of a drive to refocus on the food sector and lower its debt . 
The French unit of Ferruzzi Agricola Finanziaria also disclosed a 40 % rise in its consolidated net profit for the first half of 1989 , excluding nonrecurring items and after payments to minority interests . 
Beghin-Say said the sale will be done in two parts and will raise a total of 2.025 billion francs ( $ 325 million ) . 
This will include the sale of its interest in the joint venture Beghin Corbehem to Feldemuehle AG . 
The West German paper company entered the venture in April 1988 by acquiring a 50 % stake , also from Beghin-Say . 
The other part of the transaction will see Beghin-Say sell its 50 % stake in its Kaysersberg paper affiliate to an unspecified unit of the petrochemical group Montedison S.p . A. , which is also controlled by Ferruzzi . 
And in a separate transaction , Beghin-Say will sell its remaining 25 % interest in A.T.B. , a holding company for international trading assets , to an unspecified unit of Ferruzzi for 258 million francs . 
Esselte AB , the Stockholm office supplies company , as expected , proposed to acquire the 22 % it does n't own of its U.S. unit , Esselte Business Systems Inc . 
The price in the proposal is $ 43.50 for each of the 4.9 million shares the parent does n't own , or $ 213.2 million . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Esselte closed yesterday at $ 43.50 a share , up $ 1 . 
A committee of outside directors for the Garden City , N.Y. , unit is evaluating the proposal ; the parent asked it to respond by Oct. 31 . 
The unit said it can provide no assurance a transaction will occur . 
Esselte AB sold the minority stake five years ago in a $ 40 million international share offering . 
The unit , which is the holding company for Esselte 's non-Swedish units , accounted for 58 % of sales and 71 % of operating profit last year . 
Separately , Esselte Business Systems reported third-quarter net income fell 5.9 % to $ 9.5 million , or 46 cents a share , from $ 10.1 million , or 49 cents a share , in the year-ago period . 
Sales rose 2.9 % to $ 329.2 million from $ 320 million . 
House and Senate conferees agreed to continue production of Grumman Corp. 's F-14 and to provide more than $ 3.8 billion for the Strategic Defense Initiative during the current fiscal year . 
Industry officials and congressional aides said that the main points of a compromise defense authorization bill , hammered out during a flurry of private meetings over the past few days , provide a face-saving compromise for both the White House and House Democrats . 
Although conferees are still putting the finishing touches on the package , the final agreement could be announced as early as tomorrow . 
An announcement is more likely next week , though . 
President Bush and other supporters of SDI will be able to take credit for blocking House efforts to significantly cut the program to develop a space-based antimissile system , which already has cost some $ 17 billion . 
Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn ( D. , Ga . ) and other Senate conferees have opposed the House cuts , stalling for almost two months action on a number of big-ticket items in the Pentagon 's budget . 
The Senate voted to authorize $ 4.5 billion for SDI spending in the current fiscal year , but the House , reflecting a dramatic erosion of support for the program , earmarked only $ 3.1 billion . 
Despite the widening gap between the two sides , conferees eventually followed the pattern set in previous years by opting to roughly split the difference . 
That would hold spending on the program at about the previous year 's level . 
The decision to keep the embattled F-14 's production line running for at least another year is an important victory for the House , and especially for Rep. Les Aspin ( D. , Wis . ) . 
As the head of the House conferees , Rep. Aspin has been under intense pressure from his colleagues to reject Senate provisions that would have abruptly cut further F-14 production . 
The package `` provides a temporary , golden parachute for Grumman , '' according to one congressional aide familiar with the closed-door bargaining . 
But as part of the overall agreement , Grumman and its outspoken supporters on Capitol Hill effectively will be precluded from reopening the emotional issue in the debate over next year 's budget . 
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and most senators contend that the Navy 's F-14 is too expensive in an era of shrinking Pentagon budgets . 
But the plane boasts a strong core of support in the House , where members are intent on saving Grumman jobs and are worried about potential shortages of carrier-based aircraft by the late 1990s . 
Conferees also agreed to Pentagon requests to earmark a total of nearly $ 1 billion for work on both mobile MX and Midgetman nuclear missiles , according to congressional aides . 
And lawmakers are putting the finishing touches on a compromise that would give the Air Force nearly all of the $ 2.4 billion it wants for production of Northrop Corp. 's radar-eluding B-2 bombers , which cost $ 530 million apiece . 
The final B-2 agreement is certain to require detailed testing and verification of the bomber 's capabilities , but congressional aides said the accord wo n't include a House-passed provision that would have withheld production funds until Congress approves a cheaper , scaled-down version of the $ 70 billion fleet of 132 B-2s envisioned by the Pentagon . 
Consolidated Freightways Inc. reported a 77 % drop in third-quarter net income , citing expected losses in its Emery Worldwide shipping business . 
The Menlo Park , Calif. , company said net was $ 7.4 million , or 22 cents a share , down from $ 32.3 million , or 86 cents a share , a year ago . 
Revenue totaled $ 1.01 billion , a 43 % increase from $ 704.4 million , reflecting the company 's acquisition of Emery earlier this year . 
Profit also suffered because of `` intense '' discounting in its long-haul trucking business , the company said . 
Analysts had expected Consolidated to post a slim profit , and the company 's stock was down only 25 cents to $ 30.25 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday . 
`` They have to continue to tighten their belts , '' said Craig Kloner , an analyst at Goldman , Sachs & Co . 
A round of futures-related program selling near the close sent the stock market lower in otherwise directionless trading . 
Nervousness that the market has n't seen the last of its recent volatility kept trading at a moderate pace , as did anticipation of a report on the economy 's third-quarter performance . 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average , which plunged more than 80 points in early trading Tuesday and then recovered nearly all of its losses by the close , fell 5.94 to 2653.28 in the latest session . 
The average drifted in a trading range of about 30 points throughout the day . 
The lower boundary was established just after the opening in a brief round of selling ; the upper boundary was set at midday as scattered bargain-hunting pushed prices higher . 
Buying interest in Du Pont , which declared a stock split and a dividend boost , and certain other blue-chip issues gave the industrial average a better performance than broader indexes . 
Standard & Poor 's 500-Stock Index dropped 1.20 to 342.50 ; the decline was the equivalent of a nine-point setback in the 30-stock average . 
The Dow Jones Equity Market Index fell 1.16 to 320.94 and the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index slid 0.53 to 189.52 . 
But advancing issues topped decliners by 784 to 700 on the Big Board despite the late sell programs , resulting from stock-index arbitrage . 
The programs occurred against the backdrop of a late pullback in UAL , which had held at slightly lower levels through most of the session amid optimism that another bidder might surface . 
Traders said program activity was n't in evidence through most of the session , however , and Big Board volume dropped to 155,650,000 shares from about 238 million Tuesday as concerns about the potential for additional sharp swings in the market kept other trading in check . 
`` People are sort of nervous to do anything in the market now . 
Our phones are quiet around here , '' said Don R. Hays , director of investment strategy at Wheat First Butcher & Singer Inc. , Richmond , Va . 
The gross national product report , due to be released before today 's opening , is expected to show that the economy continued to expand in the third quarter at a moderate pace . 
The consensus of economists polled by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report calls for a 2.5 % annual growth rate for GNP during the quarter . 
Du Pont , which announced plans for a 3-for-1 stock split and raised its quarterly dividend by 14 % , jumped 2 1\/2 to 117 3\/8 . 
The company also posted third-quarter earnings that were in line with analysts ' forecasts . 
Blue-chip consumer stocks also provided a lift to the industrial average . 
American Telephone & Telegraph rose 3\/8 to 43 1\/2 in Big Board composite trading of 1.5 million shares , Chevron advanced 1 3\/4 to 66 5\/8 on 2.3 million shares , Woolworth rose 1 to 58 5\/8 , Coca-Cola Co. gained 5\/8 to 72 1\/2 and Eastman Kodak added 3\/8 to 44 1\/2 . 
But General Motors dropped 1 7\/8 to 44 7\/8 . 
Its GM Hughes Electronics and financial-services units both reported that third-quarter earnings were down from a year earlier . 
Anheuser-Busch plunged 4 3\/8 to 38 1\/2 on 3.5 million shares . 
Its third-quarter earnings were lower than analysts had forecast , and the company said it had lowered its projections for earnings growth through the end of 1990 because of planned price cuts . 
Xerox fell 3 1\/8 to 59 5\/8 . 
Disappointment with the company 's earnings for the quarter led Prudential-Bache Securities to reduce its 1989 and 1990 earnings estimates , according to Dow Jones Professional Investor Report . 
Computer Associates International , the most active Big Board issue , was another victim of an earnings-related sell-off . 
The stock fell 3\/4 to 12 7\/8 as 3.6 million shares were traded in the wake of its report that fiscal second-quarter net income fell 66 % from a year ago . 
Insurance stocks moved higher in the wake of a strong third-quarter earnings report from Chubb , coming on the heels of speculation that last week 's devastating earthquake in the San Francisco area would lead to higher premium rates . 
Chubb , whose net income for the quarter exceeded most analysts ' expectations , rallied 3 3\/4 to 86 1\/2 . 
Aetna Life & Casualty gained 1 3\/8 to 61 1\/8 , Cigna advanced 7\/8 to 64 3\/4 , Travelers added 1\/2 to 40 3\/8 and American International Group rose 3 1\/8 to 107 3\/4 . 
Comprehensive Care plunged 4 3\/4 to 3 5\/8 on 1.2 million shares . 
The company reported a third-quarter loss and said it is holding talks with its bank lenders for an extension on some overdue debt payments . 
TW Services dropped 1 1\/4 to 31 1\/4 following the postponement of a $ 1.4 billion junk-bond offering that would have permitted Coniston Partners to complete its takeover of the company . 
Coniston said it would pursue `` various financing alternatives . '' 
UAL stock declined by 9 to 161 after nobody surfaced to claim credit for aggressive buying Tuesday by Bear Stearns that sent UAL stock up 35 points in a matter of hours . 
Tuesday 's rumored buyer , Coniston Partners , would n't comment on speculation that Coniston , which battled the UAL board in 1987 , might challenge the board 's decision Monday to remain independent . 
Other airline stocks were mixed . 
AMR , which owns American Airlines , rose 3 3\/8 to 72 1\/4 ; USAir Group fell 1 1\/2 to 38 5\/8 , and Delta Air Lines rose 1\/2 to 66 1\/2 after posting higher earnings for the September quarter . 
Stocks that reportedly benefited Tuesday from a Japanese buy program handled by PaineWebber gave back some of their gains . 
Procter & Gamble went down 3 1\/2 to 130 , Dow Jones fell 3 1\/2 to 37 1\/2 and Rockwell International dropped 2 1\/8 to 25 . 
However , Atlantic Richfield preserved its twopoint advance in the previous session and added 1\/8 to 103 7\/8 . 
General Mills gained 2 1\/4 to 72 7\/8 . 
Goldman Sachs placed the stock back on its list of recommended issues , raised its 1990 earnings estimate and recommended that its clients shift funds from Kellogg to General Mills . 
Kellogg dropped 1 3\/4 to 73 1\/4 . 
Manville advanced 3\/4 to 10 . 
The company offered to purchase $ 500 million of convertible preferred stock from the trust that handles its payments to asbestos victims . 
Di Giorgio gained 1 to 30 3\/4 after the company said it is starting negotiations with unidentified parties interested in acquiring its units . 
Investor Arthur Goldberg is pursuing a $ 32-a-share takeover offer . 
Esselte Business Systems rose 1 to 43 1\/2 . 
Esselte AB of Sweden offered $ 43.50 a share for the 22 % of the company it does n't already own . 
Public Service of New Hampshire went up 3\/8 to 4 . 
Northeast Utilities boosted its offer to acquire the company by $ 400 million , to $ 2.25 billion . 
Newell , which declared a 2-for-1 stock split and boosted its quarterly dividend by 14 % , added 7\/8 to 49 3\/8 . 
Also , the company posted improved third-quarter earnings . 
The American Stock Exchange Market Value Index fell 0.44 to 375.92 . 
Volume totaled 8,930,000 shares . 
Mission Resource Partners lost 5 1\/4 to 14 1\/8 . 
The partnership , which had solicited takeover offers , said it failed to receive any adequate bids for all of its operations but is reviewing offers for individual properties . 
Japan is going on a capital-spending binge that could make its trade surpluses even harder to shrink . 
Its capital spending is growing at double-digit rates for the second year in a row , and its superefficient producers of everything from cars to computer chips are rushing to expand capacity , modernize factories and develop new products . 
`` The boom 's so huge , '' says Mitsuru Saito , an economist at Sanwa Research Institute , `` it makes you think of the Golden '60s , '' when Japan developed rapidly . 
The more factories and robots Japanese manufacturers add , the more they will be able to export , and the less their domestic customers will need to import . 
At Canon Inc. , for example , sales are up nearly 20 % this year ; so , the maker of cameras and computer printers is doing what any Japanese company would do under the circumstances : It is increasing capital spending -- by 60 % . 
It is building , among other things , a new laser-beam-printer factory in western Japan that can produce up to 150,000 printers next year . 
Some 70 % of them are to be exported to the U.S. . 
Even companies in smokestack industries wrestling with world-wide overcapacity are joining the boom . 
Japan 's steelmakers are raising capital spending 22 % this year to $ 4.8 billion . 
Hitachi Zosen Corp. , a shipbuilder buried in debt just a few years ago , will build a machinery plant , its first expansion in 14 years . 
So big is the capital-spending boom that Japanese companies ' outlays in Japan topped American companies ' domestic outlays by $ 521.4 billion to $ 494.8 billion in the 12 months ended March 31 even though Japan 's total output of goods and services is less than two-thirds America 's . 
From a financial standpoint , the boom could n't come at a better time . 
Many Japanese companies expect record profits this fiscal year , and Japanese interest rates , though up a bit recently , are still low . 
And in a business system where shareholders have few rights and expect only modest dividends , companies can plow their profits back into plant and equipment . 
But some economists and government officials here are n't applauding . 
They fear that the boom may be too big for Japan 's or anyone else 's good . 
`` It 's an explosive cocktail '' thrown at the world , says Kenneth Courtis , senior economist at the Tokyo unit of Deutsche Bank Group . 
The Ministry of International Trade and Industry is so concerned that it recently took the unusual step of urging Japanese auto companies to exercise caution in capital spending . 
MITI officials hope to avoid yet-another source of trade friction with the U.S. even though export restraints currently limit Japanese car exports to the U.S. . 
Not everyone is worried , however . 
Some economists -- and many Japanese companies -- are puzzled by the warnings . 
The investment boom is mainly sparked , they say , by strong domestic demand and is n't likely to increase exports sharply . 
Moreover , much investment is n't aimed at increasing capacity . 
According to a survey of some 2,400 large companies by the Japan Development Bank , expanded capacity is the goal of just 51.8 % of the outlays ; for manufacturers alone , the figure is 32 % . 
The manufacturers said 14.2 % of their spending is designed to improve products or add new ones , 17.5 % is to cut costs , 12.5 % is for research and development , and the rest is for maintenance and other purposes . 
But the worriers remain unconvinced . 
With Japan running enormous trade surpluses against much of the world , they think that Japan should meet the increased domestic demand by importing more . 
And eventually , they contend , domestic demand will weaken , forcing companies to emphasize exports again . 
`` If there 's a further drive to export , '' says Nobuyuki Arai , an economist at the Japan Development Bank , `` that 'll be a problem . '' 
Even in the short run , the investment boom could exacerbate a disturbing trend : Japanese exports are showing surprisingly little tendency to ease . 
Japanese auto makers , for example , are increasing their production capacity in the U.S. ; the additional production should , in part , replace imported vehicles with locally manufactured ones . 
But although Japanese companies increased their U.S. auto output by 42 % from January to September compared with the year-earlier period , their exports to the U.S. will drop only 9 % this year , Nikko Research Center estimates . 
In contrast to previous economic booms , Japanese auto companies are n't just trying to boost production . 
Many are pouring money into developing high-quality products to target affluent consumers and , to some extent , to avoid direct combat with cheaper cars from South Korea and Taiwan . 
Others are replacing older facilities with flexible assembly lines on which different models can be turned out at once . 
So many companies are investing in high-tech machinery that Fanuc Ltd. , a robot maker , also had to build a new plant . 
The buildup is `` making Japan clearly more efficient , more technologically advanced and more competitive , '' declares a Western diplomat in Tokyo . 
But whatever its effects on exports and imports , Japan 's investment boom during the past two years has been stimulated at least partly by soaring domestic demand . 
Japan 's marathon economy , growing at 4.3 % this year , is now in its 35th month of expansion , and some economists are betting that the boom will outlast the record 57-month expansion in the late 1960s . 
Japanese consumers are increasingly eager to spend their money , especially on high-priced goods such as 29-inch television sets and luxury cars . 
Nissan Motor Co. 's domestic auto sales are up 20 % this year largely because its expensive Cima , Sylvia and Cefiro models are in heavy demand . 
`` One dealer told me that if he had more cars , he 'd sell them right away , '' says Takuro Endo , Nissan executive vice president . 
He adds that the company is trying to keep up with demand `` by overworking '' its employees . 
Similarly , Honda Motor Co. 's sales are so brisk that workers grumble they have n't had a Saturday off in years , despite the government 's encouragement of more leisure activity . 
With demand growing and workers in short supply , many Japanese manufacturers are spending heavily on automation . 
Among them are the shipbuilders , which had halved their shipyard work forces to cut costs during a prolonged slump in demand but now are capturing an increased share of the strengthening global market . 
Sasebo Heavy Industries Co. , a medium-sized shipbuilder , expects its sales to increase 30 % this year , largely because of rising demand for oil tankers . 
Once one Japanese company steps up its investments , the whole industry follows . 
Because most businesses put market share above profitability , to let a competitor 's addition to capacity go unmatched is to concede defeat . 
The emphasis on market share is evident at Daikin Industries Ltd. , Japan 's biggest maker of industrial air conditioners . 
Seeing new office buildings sprout up and its sales soar , Daikin is building another plant , which will lift its production capacity 50 % . 
The expansion is aimed not just at meeting demand but also at expanding the company 's market share to 30 % from 27 % currently . 
Besides , Daikin 's major competitors , Hitachi Ltd. and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. , `` are all adding production lines , '' a Daikin spokesman says . 
`` Until now , we were trying to increase productivity with the facilities we already had . 
But we ca n't produce enough anymore . '' 
The competition is even more heated in the auto industry , where companies are racing one another in a world-wide market . 
Nissan aims to expand its 25 % share of the market to 30 % by spending $ 141 million on a plant in southern Japan that could make as many as 240,000 cars a year . 
Meanwhile , Toyota Motor Corp. 's $ 247 million buildup is increasing its annual capacity by 180,000 cars , and Honda is spending $ 317 million on expansion . 
Mazda Motor Corp. is still considering its options , but it boldly aims to double its annual domestic sales to 800,000 cars in the next four years . 
Those who are n't worried about how Japanese manufacturers ' investments will affect trade note that many new products are n't replacements for imports . 
Although imports account for less than 1 % of beer sales in Japan , Asahi Breweries Ltd. , which has been gaining share with its popular dry beer , plans to fend off Japanese competitors by pouring $ 1.06 billion into facilities to brew 50 % more beer . 
But new-product development will make Japanese companies stronger , and big investments in `` domestic '' industries such as beer will make it even tougher for foreign competitors to crack the Japanese market . 
Moreover , much of the investment boom is in high-tech fields in which Japanese companies have only limited foreign competition ; so , more investment practically assures more exports . 
Toshiba Corp. , for example , is spending $ 986 million on two new plants to build four-megabit dynamic random access memories , the next generation of computer chips . 
The product is n't widely used yet , but Toshiba , which has already beaten everyone else in producing the current-generation one-megabit DRAMs , believes that its early investment will heighten its chances of beating its competitors again . 
`` It 's important to gain leadership , '' a Toshiba spokesman says . 
Meanwhile , Toshiba 's Japanese rivals , Hitachi , Fujitsu Ltd. and NEC Corp. , are n't sitting still . 
After doubling production in one plant , NEC is spending $ 275 million to build another plant that , in two years , will be able to make a million four-megabit DRAMs a year . 
The new chip plants `` wo n't be excessive investment , '' says Hajime Sasaki , an NEC vice president . 
`` We have enough products to make and the markets to sell these products . '' 
Some of Japan 's goods being produced as a result of the investment boom are already successful overseas . 
Toyota 's $ 35,000 Lexus automobile , a luxury model that it started shipping to the U.S. only last month , is racking up orders at a time when U.S.-made luxury-car sales are slow . 
Toyota plans to raise Lexus exports when a new plant starts up next year . 
What if its sales weaken someday ? 
Japanese companies have a caveat competitor attitude . 
If excess capacity develops , they say , not everyone will suffer . 
The losers will be those with the least attractive products , and many of them , analysts think , will be foreign companies . 
Benjamin Franklin Federal Savings & Loan Association said it plans to restructure in the wake of a third-quarter loss of $ 7.7 million , or $ 1.01 a share , reflecting an $ 11 million addition to loan-loss reserves . 
The Portland , Ore. , thrift said the restructuring should help it meet new capital standards from the Financial Institution Reform , Recovery and Enforcement Act . 
A year ago , Benjamin Franklin had profit of $ 1.8 million , or 23 cents a share . 
In over-the-counter trading yesterday , Benjamin Franklin rose 25 cents to $ 4.25 . 
The company said the restructuring 's initial phase will feature a gradual reduction in assets and staff positions . 
The plan may include selling branches , consolidating or eliminating departments , and winding down or disposing of unprofitable units within 18 months . 
Initially , the company said it will close its commercial real-estate lending division , and stop originating new leases at its commercial lease subsidiary . 
Details of the restructuring wo n't be made final until regulators approve the regulations mandated by the new federal act , the company said . 
Amdahl Corp. , a maker of mainframe computers , reported a sharp decline in net income for its third quarter , citing pricecutting by competitors and adverse effects from a strong U.S. dollar . 
Net income fell 37 % to $ 32.9 million , or 30 cents a share , from $ 52.2 million , or 48 cents a share , in the year-ago period . 
Revenue rose 15 % to $ 534.3 million from $ 464.7 million . 
Amdahl 's results were somewhat worse than expected . 
Jay Stevens , an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds , said he expected the Sunnyvale , Calif. , company to earn 35 cents a share for the quarter and said the firm 's weaker profit was partly the result of increased competition from International Business Machines Corp. , Amdahl 's principal competitor for mainframe sales . 
ONEIDA Ltd. declared a 10 % stock dividend , payable Dec. 15 to stock of record Nov. 17 . 
The Oneida , N.Y. , maker of consumer , food-service and industrial products also declared a quarterly cash dividend of 12 cents a share , with the same payable and record dates . 
The cash dividend paid on the common stock also will apply to the new shares , the company said . 
The move rewards shareholders and should improve the stock 's liquidity , Oneida said . 
The company has about 8.8 million shares outstanding . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Oneida 's shares closed at $ 18.375 a share , unchanged . 
Federal health officials are expected today to approve a program granting long-deferred access to the drug AZT for children with acquired immune deficiency syndrome . 
Announcement of the approval is expected to be made by Louis Sullivan , secretary of Health and Human Services . 
The clearance by the Food and Drug Administration comes after two years of restricted access for the youngest victims of AIDS to the only antiviral drug yet cleared to treat the fatal disease . 
The drug will be given treatment investigational new drug status , a label accorded to drugs believed effective but lacking formal approval . 
The move will make the drug available free of charge for a time to children with the disease and symptoms of advanced infection . 
Adults with AIDS have had access to AZT since FDA approved the drug 's usage for adults in March 1987 . 
But despite more than two years of research showing AZT can relieve dementia and other symptoms in children , the drug still lacks federal approval for use in the youngest patients . 
As a result , many youngsters have been unable to obtain the drug and , for the few exceptions , insurance carriers wo n't cover its cost of $ 6,400 a year . 
So far , AIDS has stricken 1,859 children under age 13 , with many times that number believed to carry the infection without symptoms . 
To date , 1,013 of those children have died , according to the federal Centers for Disease Control . 
Mothers of young AIDS patients expressed somber satisfaction . 
`` Thank goodness it 's happening . 
It should have happened sooner , '' said Elizabeth Glaser , a Los Angeles mother and activist who contracted the AIDS virus through a blood transfusion , and transmitted it to two of her children . 
One of them , a daughter Ariel , died a year ago at age seven after her parents unsuccessfully pleaded for the drug . 
`` I could get AZT , '' says Mrs. Glaser , who bears her infection without any symptoms . 
`` But my daughter could n't , until she was too ill to take it . 
To watch your child die is an inhuman experience . '' 
Her son , healthy and symptom-free , currently takes no medication . 
The delay in getting AZT to children has been blamed on a combination of factors . 
Traditionally , the medical establishment has waited two years to approve adult treatments for pediatric uses , because of a combination of conservative safety standards and red tape . 
Secondly , critics have charged AZT 's maker Burroughs Wellcome Co. with corporate inertia because children account for just 1 % of the patient population and hence a small part of the large and lucrative market . 
Wellcome has replied that it is moving ahead to compile the relevant data , and recently promised to develop a pediatric syrup form easier for youngsters to take . 
Still , all this comes nearly a year and a half after Philip Pizzo of the National Cancer Institute offered evidence that AZT could reverse the ravages of AIDS dementia , sometimes prompting dramatic recovery of IQ levels and reappearance of lost motor skills . 
Since then , roughly 50 pediatric patients have received the drug in his program . 
To some mothers , the expected FDA action is a poignant reminder of what might have been . 
`` My first reaction is I do n't understand why it 's taken so long . 
Why has it taken people so long for people to understand pediatric AIDS is a major problem ? '' asked Helen Kushnick , whose son Samuel died six years ago at age three , victim of a tainted transfusion . 
Similar sentiments were voiced on Capitol Hill . 
`` While I 'm pleased the FDA is finally releasing AZT for children , it 's taken much too long to get to this point , '' said Rep. Ted Weiss . 
`` Why did it take Burroughs Wellcome so long to apply '' for treatment investigational new drug status ? the New York Democrat asked . 
`` Let 's not forget this is the same company that has been profiteering with this drug for 2 1\/2 years , '' Mr. Weiss added . 
Mrs. Glaser , who is a co-founder of the Pediatric AIDS Foundation , based in Santa Monica , Calif. , condemned neither bureaucratic nor corporate foot-dragging . 
`` There 's no finger to be pointed , '' she said . 
`` The crucial thing is that we learn our lesson well , and to make sure other experimental drugs , like Bristol-Myers Co. 's DDI , do n't follow the same frustrating course as AZT . '' 
AIDS dementia -- which gradually steals children 's ability to speak , walk and think -- is often the most striking aspect of the pediatric syndrome . 
For some patients , AZT has restored the ability to ride a bicycle or solve puzzles , giving back a piece of their childhood if only temporarily . 
`` It 's impossible to overstate how much this means to the families of these patients , '' said Samuel Broder , director of the National Cancer Institute and a main developer of AZT . 
AVON RENT-A-CAR & TRUCK Corp. said it declared a dividend of one warrant for each three shares of common stock . 
Currently , Avon , based in Santa Monica , Calif. , has 3.3 million common shares outstanding . 
About 1.1 million Class C warrants were issued , the company said . 
Each of the Class C warrants will enable the holders to purchase one share of common stock at $ 5.50 . 
The warrants may be exercised until 90 days after their issue date . 
Avon also said it will issue an additional 243,677 of the Class C warrants to holders of its Class A , Class B and unclassified warrants . 
Issuance of those warrants will be at the rate of one-third warrant for each warrant exercised . 
THE BIG BOARD PLANS to launch its own vehicle for program trading today amid growing controversy over the practice . 
The new `` baskets '' of stocks will allow big investors to buy or sell all 500 S&P index stocks in a single trade . 
The exchange argues that the product , which the SEC temporarily approved yesterday , will help ease rather than worsen any volatility in the stock market . 
SEC Chairman Breeden said he would consider imposing `` circuit breakers '' to halt program trading during sharp swings in the market . 
Kemper Financial Services has stopped executing its stock trades through four big securities firms because of their involvement in program trading , which Kemper and others say is ruining the market . 
The main capital-gains tax plan in the Senate is n't winning support from Democrats who favor a reduction . 
The trend is making proponents less optimistic a tax cut will pass . 
Bethlehem Steel 's profit plunged 54 % in the third quarter , hurt by higher costs and lower shipments to key clients . 
Also , Armco and National Intergroup had lower operating profit in steel , marking what may be the end of a two-year industry boom . 
Columbia S&L posted a quarterly loss of $ 226.3 million as the Beverly Hills thrift reeled from new industry rules and turmoil in junk bonds . 
Anheuser-Busch plans to aggressively discount its major beer brands , setting the stage for a price war as the beer industry 's growth slows . 
PS New Hampshire received a sweetened bid from another suitor , United Illuminating , which valued its new proposal at $ 2.29 billion , apparently topping all others so far . 
Financial markets quieted , with stock prices edging lower , bonds inching up and the dollar almost unchanged . 
The Dow Jones industrials closed off 5.94 points , at 2653.28 . 
Fed Chairman Greenspan said the central bank can wipe out inflation without causing a recession , but doing so will inflict short-term pain . 
GM 's Hughes Electronics unit said profit slid 22 % in the third quarter . 
The finance unit , GMAC , said net fell 3.1 % , but EDS 's profit rose 16 % . 
Campeau reportedly may receive a $ 1.3 billion offer for Bloomingdale 's from Tokyu Department Store of Japan . 
Campeau declined to comment . 
UAL 's pilots and machinists unions appear to hold the key to any future takeover bid for the airline . 
Provigo plans to sell all non-food operations to refocus on its retail and wholesale grocery business . 
Also , Chairman Pierre Lortie resigned . 
Westinghouse expects operating margins of over 10 % and sharply higher earnings per share next year due to a major restructuring . 
Some major U.S. trade partners quickly rejected a compromise proposal by Bush to liberalize trade and reduce farm-product subsidies . 
Markets -- 
Stocks : Volume 155,650,000 shares . 
Dow Jones industrials 2653.28 , off 5.94 ; transportation 1199.32 , off 11.38 ; utilities 216.49 , up 1.45 . 
Bonds : Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3427.39 , up 
Commodities : Dow Jones futures index 129.48 , up 0.24 ; spot index 130.73 , off 0.03 . 
Dollar : 141.52 yen , up 0.07 ; 1.8353 marks , off 0.0002 . 
GORBACHEV SAID Moscow wo n't intervene in East bloc moves to democracy . 
The Kremlin leader , on the first day of a three-day official visit to Helsinki , assured Finland 's president that the Soviet Union has `` no moral or political right '' to interfere with moves toward democracy in Poland , Hungary or elsewhere in Eastern Europe . 
In Moscow , the Soviet State Bank announced a 90 % devaluation of the ruble against the dollar for private transactions , in an apparent attempt to curb a black market for hard currency . 
The action will establish a two-tier exchange rate . 
Workers at six mines in Arctic Circle coal fields called strikes over a series of economic and political demands . 
The move defied a law , approved in Moscow this month , banning such walkouts . 
THE HOUSE FAILED to override Bush 's veto of a bill easing abortion funding . 
The chamber voted 231-191 , 51 votes short of the two-thirds majority needed to overturn the president 's veto of legislation renewing support of Medicaid abortions for poor women who are victims of rape and incest . 
The roll call was considered an illustration of the limits of power that the resurgent abortion-rights movement faces . 
The legislation was part of a $ 156.7 billion measure funding the departments of Labor , Education , and Health . 
Michigan 's Senate passed a bill requiring girls to get parental consent for an abortion and Pennsylvania 's House cleared a measure banning abortions after the 24th week of pregnancy . 
The FDA is expected to approve today a program granting access free of charge to the drug AZT for children with AIDS . 
Adults have had access to the only approved antiviral drug since 1987 . 
Research shows AZT can relieve dementia and other symptoms in children , 1,859 of whom are known to have been infected . 
Congress sent to Bush a $ 2.85 billion emergency package to assist in the recovery from last week 's California earthquake and from Hurricane Hugo . 
The action came after the Senate approved the House-passed measure . 
In the San Francisco Bay area , more than 13,000 people were homeless and landslides threatened more houses . 
House-Senate conferees agreed to continue production of Grumman Corp. 's F-14 jet and to provide more than $ 3.8 billion during the current fiscal year to develop a space-based anti-missile system . 
The final package is expected to be announced within the next week . 
The White House has decided to seek changes in pesticide law that are aimed at speeding the removal of harmful chemicals from the food supply . 
The changes , which could be announced as early as today , would apply to pesticides and other substances found on fresh and processed foods , officials said . 
East German leader Krenz said he was willing to hold talks with opposition groups pressing for internal changes . 
The Communist Party chief , facing what is viewed as the nation 's worst unrest in nearly 40 years , also said he would allow East Germans to travel abroad more freely , but made clear that the Berlin Wall would remain . 
A Lebanese Christian alliance accepted an Arab-sponsored proposal aimed at ending Lebanon 's 14-year-old civil war . 
The move by the coalition of political parties and Lebanon 's largest Christian militia isolated military chief Aoun , who has rejected the plan , which includes political changes and a Syrian troop withdrawal from Beirut . 
Baker offered to review Israel 's `` suggested changes '' to his proposal for direct Israeli-Palestinian talks . 
But the secretary of state advised Israel that attempting to overhaul the five-point plan risked delaying the negotiations aimed at Mideast peace . 
NATO defense ministers said the 16-nation alliance continues to need a strong nuclear strategy despite political changes in Eastern Europe . 
The ministers , concluding a two-day meeting in southern Portugal , welcomed Moscow 's pledges to cut its military forces , but urged the Soviets to do more to slash short-range nuclear weapons . 
The Justice Department indicated a possible challenge to a court order allowing former National Security Adviser Poindexter to subpoena ex-President Reagan 's personal papers for use in the defense case against Iran-Contra charges . 
A department spokesman said the ruling `` raised a serious question '' about the office of the president . 
Bush said Washington would continue a trade embargo against Nicaragua , declaring that the Central American country poses `` an unusual and extraordinary threat '' to the security of the U.S. . 
Meanwhile , Secretary of State Baker said the U.S. protested to Moscow over shipments of East bloc arms to Salvadoran rebels from Managua . 
A landslide engulfed a hillside slum in Sao Paulo , Brazil , and at least 20 people , most of them children , were missing and feared dead . 
The city 's mayor vowed to take legal action against developers who had been excavating at the crest of the hill . 
Czechoslovakia 's premier said he supports broad political and economic restructuring , but ruled out any dialogue between Prague 's Communist government and independent human-rights or dissident groups . 
Ladislav Adamec , ending a two-day visit to Austria , pledged changes in Czechoslovakia , including freer travel to the West . 
Died : Mary McCarthy , 77 , novelist and literary critic , in New York City , of cancer ... . 
Marion Harper , 73 , founder and ex-chief executive of Interpublic Group of Cos. , in Oklahoma City , of a heart attack . 
Adolph Coors Co. said William K. Coors , chairman , assumed the additional responsibilities of president , succeeding Jeffrey H. Coors . 
Jeffrey Coors , 44 years old , had been president since 1985 , when he succeeded his father Joseph in the job . 
But the brewer said Jeffrey Coors voluntarily gave up the position to focus more of his energy on Coors Technology Co. , a small unit of Coors he has run for several years . 
A Coors spokesman said the company does n't believe the move will further increase William Coors 's influence or reduce the influence of Jeffrey Coors , Peter Coors or Joseph Coors Jr. , who run the company 's three operating units . 
`` It certainly was n't intended to be a demotion , '' the spokesman said . 
`` Pete and Jeff and Joe Jr. have taken over the reins and are doing most of the work . 
We do n't think this will affect that . '' 
Jeffrey , Peter and Joseph Jr. are brothers . 
William Coors is their uncle . 
Jeffrey , Peter , Joseph Jr. , William and Joseph Sr. constitute the company 's board . 
Peter Coors runs the Coors Brewing Co. unit , the nation 's fourth-largest brewery that accounted for $ 1.24 billion of Adolph Coors 's $ 1.52 billion in 1988 sales . 
Joseph Jr. runs Coors Ceramics Co. , the other operating unit , which had about $ 150 million in 1988 sales . 
Dun & Bradstreet Corp. said business failures fell 17.8 % to 11,586 in the third quarter from 14,099 in the year-earlier period . 
In the first nine months of this year , business failures dropped 15.6 % to 37,820 from 44,796 . 
Except for a few spots , notably Georgia , Virginia and Michigan , failures declined almost across the board , according to the business information services company . 
D&B defines a business failure as a company that closes with losses to creditors . 
The current decline in failures continues a trend begun in late 1987 , D&B said . 
The drop accelerated in this year 's third quarter , underscoring an overall lack of stress in the U.S. economy , the company said . 
Failures in seven of nine regional areas fell more than 10 % in the nine months . 
The South Atlantic States were the only region to report an increase in bankruptcies , up 5.3 % to 5,791 from 5,502 . 
This occurred partly because of more competition as the number of new businesses surged . 
The only industry sector to report more business failures for the nine months was the finance , insurance and real-estate sector , where bankruptcies grew 8.1 % to 2,046 from 1,892 . 
The troubled savings-and-loan industry and subsequent stress in real-estate businesses fueled bankruptcies in this sector , D&B said . 
A major Tokyo newspaper reported that a Japanese department store concern is planning to offer about $ 1.3 billion to buy Bloomingdale 's . 
Campeau Corp. , the chain 's owner , declined to comment on the report . 
A spokeswoman said Toronto-based Campeau has received `` expressions of interest '' in Bloomingdale 's , but she declined to comment on whether any actual bids had been made . 
Nihon Keizai Shimbun , Japan 's leading economic newspaper , reported Wednesday that Tokyu Department Store Co. is planning to team up with U.S. and Western European financing to buy the New York-based retail chain , which Campeau has put up for sale . 
The service did n't identify its Tokyu sources . 
`` This is the first of many rumors we expect to hear during the sale 's process , '' said a Bloomingdale 's spokesman . 
`` We wo n't comment on them . '' 
Tokyu executives were n't available for comment early Thursday morning in Tokyo . 
Campeau 's chairman , Robert Campeau , said at its annual meeting in July that he valued Bloomingdale 's at $ 2 billion . 
Among previously disclosed possible bidders is Bloomingdale 's Chairman Marvin Traub , who has aligned himself with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Blackstone Group . 
Investment bankers in Tokyo confirmed that Tokyu Department Store is one of several Japanese companies that has been approached by representatives of a management committee headed by Bloomingdale 's Mr. Traub . 
But they said detailed financial figures have n't been passed yet to any prospective buyers . 
`` Nobody is going to make a real bid before the middle of November , '' said one investment banker familiar with the discussions in Japan . 
`` Tokyu is one of the potential buyers who might raise its hand . 
But it 's in very early stages still . '' 
Bloomingdale 's is a 17-store chain acquired last year by Campeau in its $ 6.6 billion acquisition of Federated . 
Bloomingdale 's does an estimated $ 1.2 billion in annual sales . 
The sale of Bloomingdale 's is a condition of efforts by Toronto-based Olympia & York Developments Ltd. to arrange $ 800 million in bridge financing for Campeau , which disclosed last month that its retailing units , Federated Department Stores Inc. and Allied Stores Corp. , were strapped for cash . 
O&Y , owned by Toronto 's Reichmann family , is also supervising major restructuring and refinancing of Campeau , a Toronto-based real estate and retailing company . 
One executive familiar with the Bloomingdale 's situation said , `` No book has been issued regarding Bloomingdale 's , there are no projections , so I doubt very much whether any bid has been made . '' 
Separately , a Campeau shareholder filed suit , charging Campeau , Chairman Robert Campeau and other officers with violating securities law . 
The suit , filed in U.S. District Court in Manhattan , seeks class-action status . 
The suit accuses the retailer and several of its officers of making false and misleading statements about the company 's business affairs . 
The suit says the company failed to disclose material adverse information about its financial condition . 
A spokesman for the company said Campeau has n't seen the suit and declined to comment . 
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. must extend its offer for LIN Broadcasting Corp. because it has `` not yet announced committed financing sufficient to complete '' the bid , LIN said in New York . 
According to Securities and Exchange Commission rules , McCaw is required to keep its offer for the cellular-phone and broadcasting concern open for at least five business days after the announcement of the financing , LIN said . 
McCaw 's offer is scheduled to expire tomorrow . 
Last week , McCaw said it obtained `` firm '' financing commitments from three major banks in regard to its bid to control LIN Broadcasting . 
The banks jointly committed $ 1.2 billion of financing , subject to certain conditions , McCaw said . 
A spokesman for McCaw said the company was `` moving forward with our financing . '' 
He added that `` hopefully LIN will conduct a fair auction . '' 
McCaw wants to buy 22 million shares of LIN for $ 125 each , or $ 2.75 billion , which would result in McCaw 's owning 50.3 % of LIN . 
The offer is in limbo , however , because LIN has agreed to merge its cellular-phone businesses with BellSouth Corp . 
In national over-the-counter trading yesterday , LIN rose 50 cents , to $ 109.25 . 
NICHOLS INSTITUTE declared a 2-for-1 split of its common stock , payable Nov. 27 to stock of record Nov. 10 . 
The clinical testing services holding company is based in San Juan Capistrano , Calif . 
StatesWest Airlines , Phoenix , Ariz. , said it sent a more detailed merger proposal to much-larger Mesa Airlines . 
Farmington , N.M.-based Mesa has consistently rejected StatesWest 's offers , and early this week said its board would n't give the proposal further consideration , calling it `` vague and ill-defined '' because it did n't describe the source of funds or the specific terms of StatesWest securities which were part of the offer . 
The new letter purports to do this , saying that in addition to $ 7 a share in cash , StatesWest would offer one share of new 6 % convertible preferred stock of StatesWest it values at $ 3 a share . 
It also said the cash portion of the transaction would be financed with StatesWest 's own cash and short-term investments , plus debt and other financing arranged through Hibbard Brown & Co. , the company 's investment banker . 
In national over-the-counter trading yesterday , Mesa closed at $ 7.25 , up 25 cents . 
StatesWest asked Mesa to repond by Oct. 31 . 
Mesa President Larry Risley said his board had received Stateswest 's most recent offer and was reviewing it . 
Spiegel Inc. , citing continuing improvement in the apparel market , said third-quarter net income jumped 65 % from the soft year-earlier period , on an 11 % increase in revenue . 
The catalog retailer reported net income of $ 10.8 million , or 21 cents a share , up sharply from $ 6.6 million , or 13 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue rose to $ 372.1 million from $ 336.4 million . 
Spiegel said margins improved because its inventory position this year did n't need the costly markdowns required to trim last year 's swollen levels . 
A spokeswoman said the apparel market troughed in the first half of 1988 , then began showing improvement in the second half of last year . 
`` We 've seen continued improvement in 1989 , '' she said . 
The year-ago quarter 's results were crimped by expenses associated with Spiegel 's $ 260 million acquisition of catalog-clothing-merchandiser Eddie Bauer , Spiegel noted . 
In addition , the company said ongoing cost-cutting efforts contributed to the latest period 's earnings upturn . 
Spiegel is 84%-controlled by the Otto family of West Germany . 
In national over-the-counter trading , the company 's shares climbed 37.5 cents to $ 20.375 . 
For the latest nine months , Spiegel 's net climbed a solid 47 % to $ 23.8 million , or 46 cents a share , from $ 16.2 million , or 34 cents . 
Unlike the quarter 's results , which were based on roughly equal shares outstanding , nine-month per-share figures reflect an increase in average common shares outstanding to 51.9 million from 47 million . 
Nine-month revenue was $ 1.02 billion , up 22 % from $ 841.5 million . 
The bad news in the junk bond market yesterday was that TW Services , a group of restaurant chains , became the latest prospective issuer to get a cold shoulder from bond buyers . 
The good news -- to fans of stable credit , at least -- is what the rejection says about the state of mind of junk buyers . 
Apparently they are learning to say no to excess risk . 
Coniston Partners , which with related entities controls 80 % of TW , had been planning to sell $ 1.15 billion of junk bonds , among other things to finance their acquisition of the remaining public shares . 
But Coniston , a New York partnership managed by the firm of Gollust , Tierney & Oliver , yesterday announced that `` in view of unsettled conditions in securities markets '' the offering would be postponed and restructured . 
What was n't mentioned is that Coniston and its investment banker , Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette , just completed a two-week `` road show '' for the purpose of marketing the bonds . 
And investors , at least for now , took a pass . 
TW 's junk bonds were n't , as junk bonds go , unusually weak . 
Its fast-food restaurants -- including Denny 's , Hardee 's , Quincy 's and El Pollo Loco ( `` the only significant fast-food chain to specialize in char-broiled chicken '' ) -- are stable , recession-resistant and growing . 
But unless they continued to grow , TW , based in Paramus , N.J. , would have run into trouble . 
Until recently , such buy-now , pray-for-growth-later deals were routine . 
`` But people do n't buy anything on expectation anymore , '' says Jack Utter , who manages the high-yield fund of IDS Financial Services . 
`` Investors , '' he adds , `` are getting religion . '' 
The TW buy-out may yet be financed . 
`` There is nothing wrong with the company , '' says Coniston principal Paul Tierney . 
The rub , he says , is that `` the junk market is n't as deep '' as before . 
TW 's stockholder meeting was postponed from tomorrow to Nov. 21 . 
By then , DLJ hopes to be able to sell less-junky junk bonds . 
Gollust , Tierney & Oliver is likely to contribute more than the $ 120 million in equity it had planned on . 
Banks may contribute more senior debt . 
And the total amount of junk financing will be reduced . 
A DLJ banker , putting a best possible face on it , asserts that `` very few people said they did n't like the credit quality . 
People said they did n't think a billion-dollar deal would trade . '' 
But trading risk stems from credit risk . 
And by adding equity , DLJ would seem to be acknowledging that credit risk was a concern . 
Indeed , the DLJ banker says , in the reborn capital structure cash coverage of interest `` will meaningfully improve . '' 
As he sums it up : `` We are listening to the market . '' 
What is it , to borrow a term from Coniston , that so unsettled the market ? 
Some of the same risks that were cited -- and seemingly ignored -- in dozens of previous junk offerings . 
The TW prospectus says that if the acquisition had been completed earlier , pretax earnings `` would have been insufficient to cover its fixed charges , including interest on debt securities , '' by approximately $ 62.7 million in the first six months of 1989 . 
TW notes , as many junk issuers do , that `` adjusted to eliminate non-cash charges '' TW would have run a cash surplus -- in this case , of $ 56 million over six months . 
But such calculations ignore the noncash charge of depreciation , taken to allow for the gradual wearing out of french friers , deterioration of stores and the like . 
In fact , DLJ says , the company envisions capital expenses of about $ 180 million a year . 
TW 's pitch was that sales and earnings at its restaurants have risen steadily and that people wo n't stop eating during a downturn . 
But they wo n't necessarily eat at Denny 's . 
The fast-food business is `` intensely competitive , '' notes Wertheim Schroder analyst John Rohs . 
Prospective bond buyers noted that TW historically has prospered because it has been willing to spend aggressively on remodeling restaurants and redoing menus . 
`` We were concerned that they were n't going to generate enough cash for capital spending and also to pay down debt , '' says a big investor in high-yield debt . 
DLJ argues that TW could , if necessary , cut capital spending , since half of what it plans to spend is for `` growth , '' rather than maintenance . 
But investors noted that under the shelved offering , TW would have needed to grow to meet its debt payments . 
Its calculations for meeting cash charges ignore $ 52 million a year in interest on cash-deferred , or zero-coupon debentures -- which ultimately would have had to be paid . 
The prospectus notes `` there can be no assurance '' that future growth will continue at past levels . 
In the recent past , bond buyers did n't seek such assurance . 
Now , apparently , they do . 
TW Services 
( NYSE ; Symbol : TW ) 
Business : Restaurants 
Year ended Dec. 31 , 1988 \* 
Revenue : $ 3.57 billion 
Net Income : $ 66.9 million ; $ 1.36 a share \*\* 
Third quarter , Sept. 30 , 1989 : ( Net Loss : 7 cents share ) vs. net income : 51 cents a share 
Average daily trading volume : 179,032 shares 
Common shares outstanding : 49 million 
\* Includes results of Denny 's Inc. , acquired in September 
\*\* Includes $ 9 million write-down of assets and takeover defense costs . 
Maggie Thatcher must be doing something right ; her political enemies are screaming louder than ever . 
Mrs. Thatcher , who was practicing the read-my-lips school of politics years before Mr. Bush encountered it , has made clear her opposition to refashioning Britain 's free-market policies to suit the bureaucrats in Brussels . 
In return , Mrs. Thatcher is excoriated from Fleet Street to Paris as an obstructionist . 
Well , it now turns out that Mrs. Thatcher had to travel across the globe to the 49-member Commonwealth summit in Kuala Lumpur to discomfit the Holy Order of Consensus Builders . 
`` A disastrous farce in Malaysia , '' screamed the Manchester Guardian . 
`` She can no longer be trusted to behave in a civilised -- that is unflaky -- fashion when abroad . '' 
Egad . 
Canada 's Brian Mulroney and Australia 's Bob Hawke , the paper said , were `` enraged . '' 
The London Times said she had `` contravened protocol . '' 
As usual , her sin was saying what she thought . 
She issued a separate statement , separating herself from a Commonwealth document reasserting the political value of imposing sanctions against South Africa . 
While supporting the Commonwealth `` in utterly condemning apartheid , '' her statement urged it to `` encourage change '' rather than inflict further punishment on the country 's black population . 
Actually there is a consensus somewhere on sanctions : In May a Gallup Poll found that most South African blacks , 85 % , oppose economic sanctions . 
Still , Mrs. Thatcher had once again gone against the grain . 
Malaysia 's Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad sniffed , `` If everybody else puts out their left foot and you put out your right foot , you are out of step . '' 
Mrs. Thatcher : `` If it 's one against 48 , I 'm very sorry for the 48 . '' 
If indeed Mrs. Thatcher has one opponent that could throw her off political course it is Britain 's mysteriously intractable inflation problem . 
We can not , however , join the political chorus that as one proclaims how offputting it is that Mrs. Thatcher refuses to get along by going along . 
It is refreshing to see at least one world figure who knows what she believes in and is not inclined to reflexively compromise those beliefs . 
Perhaps Mrs. Thatcher understands better than those distressed at her style that ultimately history and Britain 's voters will decide who is right about Europe , sanctioning South Africa or running Britain 's economy . 
Follow With Care 
`` Work hard , play hard '' is advice Best taken with some caution , For it can bring fitness and success Or a state of total exhaustion . 
-- Edward F. Dempsey . 
Double Check 
The guest paid his bill at the resort hotel , and as he departed he noticed a sign saying , `` Have You Left Anything ? '' 
The man went back and spoke to the desk clerk : `` That sign is wrong , '' he said . 
`` It should read , `` Have You Anything Left ? '' 
-- Sam Ewing . 
After being trampled in Tuesday 's selling stampede , the Nasdaq over-the-counter market dusted itself off and moved on in moderate trading . 
But while the Composite gained 1.19 , to 462.89 , many issues did n't participate in the advance . 
`` It was a mixed bag , '' said Richard Bruno , who heads over-the-counter trading at PaineWebber . 
`` We played catch-up in some areas , and sold off in some others . '' 
Volume totaled 132.1 million shares , which is about average for the year . 
Of the 4,348 issues that changed hands , 1,074 advanced and 866 declined . 
Big financial stocks carried the day . 
The Nasdaq Financial Index rose 2.09 , to 454.86 . 
Meanwhile , the Nasdaq 100 Index of the big non-financial stocks basically stood still , easing 0.12 , to 452.23 . 
Despite the Composite 's advance , some trading officials are guardedly optimistic that the market is on the road to recovery . 
Lance Zipper , head of over-the-counter trading at Kidder Peabody , said it is difficult to make predictions based on yesterday 's trading volume . 
The advance felt more like a technical bounce , he said . 
`` The market acted better , but it was n't a tremendous comeback , '' Mr. Zipper observed . 
`` If we get a decent rally { today } , maybe the buyers will come back . '' 
If E.E. `` Buzzy '' Geduld is right , a seatbelt may come in handy during the next few sessions . 
The president of Herzog , Heine , Mr. Geduld expects the market to be `` very choppy '' for a while . 
`` There 's a lot of uncertainty out there , and it will cause a lot of swings , '' he said . 
Among active stocks , MCI Communications rose 7\/8 to 43 on 2.2 million shares , Mentor Graphics added 1\/8 to 16 3\/8 on turnover of 1.5 million shares . 
Apple Computer dropped 1 1\/8 to 46 1\/2 on one million shares . 
Almost one million shares of Sun Microsystems changed hands , but the issue was unchanged at 17 3\/4 . 
Biotechnology issues were strong . 
Amgen advanced 1 1\/2 to 56 ; Chiron jumped 2 to 29 3\/4 ; Cetus gained 1 to 16 7\/8 and Biogen rose 5\/8 to 14 5\/8 . 
The American depositary receipts of Jaguar jumped 3\/8 to 11 5\/8 on turnover of 1.9 million . 
Ford Motor said it raised its stake in the British car maker to 12.45 % of the ordinary shares outstanding . 
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing , Ford said it holds 22.8 million ordinary shares . 
The company has said it is prepared to make a bid for all of the shares outstanding of Jaguar if British government restrictions to such a transaction are removed . 
Another takeover target , LIN Broadcasting , rose 1\/2 to 109 1\/4 on 495,000 shares . 
Its suitor , McCaw Cellular , also added 1\/2 to 40 1\/2 on 395,700 shares . 
Other stocks were affected by corporate earnings . 
Informix , which recently said third-quarter net income rose to 16 cents a share from a penny a share a year ago , gained 1 5\/8 to 13 5\/8 on 810,700 shares . 
The 1988 results included a one-time gain . 
Cimflex Teknowledge rose 13\/16 , or 39 % , to 2 7\/8 on volume of 494,100 shares . 
The maker of software products and services , which had a net loss in the 1988 third quarter , earned 200,000 , or a penny a share , in this year 's quarter . 
It was Nasdaq 's biggest percentage gainer . 
Star States plunged 3 1\/4 to 8 3\/4 on 207,000 shares . 
The company suffered a $ 9 million loss in the third quarter , compared with net of $ 2.5 million a year earlier . 
Collagen dropped 2 5\/8 to 15 5\/8 on 428,000 shares . 
In its fiscal-first quarter ended Sept. 30 , the biomedical-products maker earned 10 cents a share , up from eight cents a share in the 1988 quarter , which included an extraordinary credit . 
Occupational-Urgent Care Health fell 1 3\/4 to 15 1\/2 on 354,000 shares . 
The company 's third-quarter earnings also rose to 10 cents a share from eight cents a share a year ago . 
Companies listed below reported quarterly profit substantially different from the average of analysts ' estimates . 
The companies are followed by at least three analysts , and had a minimum five-cent change in actual earnings per share . 
Estimated and actual results involving losses are omitted . 
The percent difference compares actual profit with the 30-day estimate where at least three analysts have issues forecasts in the past 30 days . 
Otherwise , actual profit is compared with the 300-day estimate . 
One day last March , CBS Sports President Neal Pilson and Olympics superagent Barry Frank met for lunch at the Lotos Club here . 
Mr. Frank told Mr. Pilson that Olympics officials wanted $ 290 million or more for TV rights to the 1994 Winter Games in Norway . 
The CBS official said that price sounded fine . 
At that price , CBS was the only player at the table when negotiations with the International Olympic Committee started in Toronto Aug. 23 . 
Dick Pound , a committee member , began by disclosing that ABC and NBC had refused to even bid . 
Then , he asked Mr. Pilson to raise his offer anyway : `` If we can have a number that starts with a three , you can have a dea . '' 
Mr. Pilson and his team huddled in a hallway and took just 10 minutes to return with a $ 300 million offer . 
Mr. Pound responded , `` It 's a deal . '' 
A beaming Mr. Pilson announced his lastest coup at a news conference that afternoon . 
Mr. Pilson 's rivals at ABC and NBC grimaced at the price . 
How could CBS get pushed into outbidding itself ? 
Well , CBS , mired in the ratings cellar and looking to sports as a way out , wanted to close the deal immediately and block its rivals from getting another chance to bid . 
But Mr. Pilson has been put in the uncomfortable role of setting off a bidding frenzy for sports rights , a frenzy that the networks had hoped to avoid . 
`` The price of poker has gone up , '' crows Charles M. Neinas , the College Football Association 's executive director . 
With CBS Inc. on a spending spree that may top $ 2.5 billion for four years of major sports events , the new bout of hyperinflation could jolt the entire broadcast business . 
CBS itself could run up losses of a few hundred million dollars on four years of various sports if its big gamble goes wrong . 
ABC , a unit of Capital Cities / ABC Inc. , and General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co. also risk losses if they outbid CBS for other contracts . 
While rights fees head skyward , ad rates wo n't . 
Advertisers already are balking at higher prices . 
`` The networks are paying too much for rights , '' warns adman Paul Isacsson of Young & Rubicam . 
`` If they ask advertisers to absorb the costs , they 're likely to lose all but a few who need sports , above all . '' 
Viewers may not be cheering , either . 
Soaring rights fees will lead to an even greater clutter of commercials . 
At the same time , some sports events will move off `` free '' television and onto cable or pay-cable , where half the nation 's TV homes ca n't see them . 
CBS has changed the rules by throwing out the old basis for sports bids -- that is , can the network alone make a profit on it ? 
Mr. Pilson emphasizes the ancillary benefits of positive press , contented affiliate stations , enthusiastic advertisers and huge audiences that might stick around to watch other CBS programs when the game is over . 
The billion-dollar question is , How much are those benefits worth ? 
Some TV people doubt they will materialize and argue that even if they do , they wo n't offset the multimillion-dollar deficits that CBS could run up . 
`` As we 've seen in the '80s , '' says Roger Werner , the president of the ESPN sports channel , `` those deals can turn sour if the numbers do n't work . 
And three years later , in a sea of red ink , the heroes can find themselves with a lot of explaining to do . '' 
CBS pursues top sports `` to belie the fact that they are n't supporting affiliates , viewers and advertisers , '' charges Thomas H. Wyman , who was ousted as chairman of CBS Inc. after Laurence A. Tisch bought a 24.9 % stake in the company and took over three years ago . 
`` They lost the entertainment crown , and they needed one . 
And they 've bought one . '' 
On just three big deals -- for four years of baseball and for the Olympic Winter Games in both 1992 and 1994 -- Pilson bid a total of $ 1.64 billion . 
That 's well over half a billion dollars more than ABC and NBC were willing to pay . 
( After 1992 , the winter and summer Olympics will be held two years apart , with the revised schedule beginning with the winter games in 1994 and the summer games in 1996 . ) 
Now , Mr. Pilson -- a former college basketball player who says a good negotiator needs `` a level of focus and intellectual attention '' similar to a good athlete-s is facing the consequences of his own aggressiveness . 
Next month , talks will begin on two coveted CBS contracts , for the pro and college basketball finals . 
CBS is likely to spend whatever it takes to keep them . 
The potential bill : more than $ 600 million for several seasons , an 80 % jump . 
A few months later , CBS 's college and pro football contracts come up for renewal ; they could go for close to $ 100 million more than CBS now pays , a 40 % to 50 % rise . 
`` What happens to those two basketball contracts will shape the next five years of network sports , '' says Peter Lund , a former CBS Sports president now at Multimedia Inc . 
J. William Grimes , former president of ESPN , says NBC may `` come in with a huge bid for college basketball to take it away from CBS and say , ` We can overbid , too . ' 
And the winners will be the colleges , not either network . 
Nor , by the way , advertisers . '' 
Mr. Pilson is an unlikely big spender . 
In the mid-1980s , after ABC had just bid a record $ 309 million for the 1988 Winter Games , he sniped at rivals for paying reckless prices . 
`` I love Pilson , but he was the guy who complained most bitterly and loudly , '' says Robert Wussler , a former CBS Sports president . 
`` And yet his company is one reason why rights are so high today . '' 
Rivals carp at `` the principle of Pilson , '' as NBC 's Arthur Watson once put it -- `` he 's always expounding that rights are too high , then he 's going crazy . '' 
But the 49-year-old Mr. Pilson is hardly a man to ignore the numbers . 
A Yale law school graduate , he began his career in corporate law and then put in years at Metromedia Inc. and the William Morris talent agency . 
In 1976 , he joined CBS Sports to head business affairs and , five years later , became its president . 
Mr. Pilson says that when he spoke out a few years ago , `` I did n't say forever , and I did n't say every property . '' 
The market changed , he adds . 
And he is n't the only big spender : NBC will pay a record $ 401 million for the 1992 Summer Games , and ESPN , 80%-owned by Capital Cities / ABC , will shell out $ 400 million for four years of baseball , airing 175 regular-season games a year . 
`` Our competitors say we overbid them . 
Who cares ? 
Maybe we recognize values the other guys do n't , '' Mr. Pilson says . 
Mr. Pilson 's `` Major Events '' strategy jelled after Mr. Tisch took over . 
Mr. Pilson recalls that in April 1986 , after CBS 's annual meeting in Philadelphia , he and Mr. Tisch took the 90-minute train ride back to New York , and Mr. Pilson used this extended private audience to outline his ambitions . 
Mr. Tisch , a billionaire in hotels and finance , was just learning the TV business . 
Five months later , Mr. Tisch took over as CBS 's chief executive , and soon he was wielding sole approval each time Mr. Pilson scribbled a frighteningly large figure on a slip of paper , sealed it in an envelope and gave it to sports negotiators . 
Then , in May 1988 , Mr. Tisch urgently needed to make a bold statement to quell rumors that he might sell the network . 
Mr. Pilson gave him one : He bid $ 243 million for rights to the 1992 Winter Games in Albertville , France ; ABC and NBC would n't bid even $ 200 million . 
That started the still-raging bidding wars . 
The `` Major Events '' strategy , Mr. Pilson says , is designed to notch a place for CBS on the crowded TV dial of the 1990s . 
It 's also a fast fix for an ailing image . 
He sees flashy sports as the only way the last-place network can cut through the clutter of cable and VCRs , grab millions of new viewers and tell them about other shows premiering a few weeks later . 
Next October , CBS , for the first time , wo n't have to start the season against the much-watched American and National baseball league championships and the World Series . 
`` I 've been struggling against that for years , '' says Jonathan Rodgers , who runs WBBM-TV , the CBS-owned station in Chicago . 
Even if baseball triggers losses at CBS -- and he does n't think it will -- `` I 'd rather see the games on our air than on NBC and ABC , '' he says . 
That is n't surprising . 
Regular TV series ratings have slumped in the past five years , and premiering new shows is `` a crap shoot , '' Mr. Pilson says . 
But top sports events are still a strong bet to lure audiences 30 % or 40 % larger than those CBS usually gets . 
Mr. Pilson says baseball and the Olympics may help CBS move up to No. 2 in the household ratings race , putting pizazz back into the network 's image . 
And the Winter Olympics will air during the February `` sweeps , '' when ratings are used to set ad rates for local stations . 
That will please once-grumpy affiliates -- another aim of the Pilson plan . 
They gleefully await the `` dream season '' in 1990 . 
CBS will air the Super Bowl , baseball playoffs , college and pro basketball finals and other premier sports events . 
`` It 's made me more committed to CBS , '' says Philip A. Jones , the president of Meredith Corp. 's broadcast group , which has two CBS affiliates . 
The CBS plan to use big-time sports as a platform for other series carries no guarantee of success , however . 
No amount of hype will bring viewers back if the shows are weak . 
`` In this market of 40 channels , sophisticated viewers and the remote control , trial is n't a guarantee of anything , '' ESPN 's Mr. Werner says . 
`` If the show ai n't a killer , they 're gone . '' 
During the 1984 Summer Games , for example , ABC touted `` Call to Glory , '' but the military drama was missing in action within weeks . 
Last October , during the 1988 Summer Games , NBC relentlessly pitched a new series , `` Tattingers . '' 
It belly-flopped anyway . 
Moreover , sports is hardly the best way to lure adult women . 
Though CBS might move up to No. 2 in household ratings , most advertisers buy based on ratings for women aged 18 to 49 . 
CBS may remain a distant No. 3 in that regard . 
Nor is CBS a shoo-in to get blockbuster ratings . 
In recent years , the World Series and the Olympics were aired against CBS 's last-place lineup . 
But CBS will put the athletes up against Bill Cosby , `` Cheers '' and other shows in NBC 's No. 1 schedule . 
Even the boon to affiliate relations may be limited . 
The sports lineup may add only 1 % to 5 % to a station 's annual profits . 
It alone is n't likely to stop a station from dumping CBS shows . 
`` The World Series , seven nights , was n't enough of an incentive , '' says Arnold Klinsky of WHEC-TV in Rochester , which dropped CBS for NBC six weeks ago . 
`` You 've got to judge where the network will be in three years . '' 
The intangible benefits may prove extremely costly if CBS ca n't avoid big losses on the sports coverage itself . 
And avoiding such losses will take a monumental effort . 
On the $ 1.06 billion baseball agreement alone , CBS is likely to lose $ 250 million in four years , contends Mr. Wussler , the former CBS man , now at Comsat Inc . 
Nevertheless , he deems the deal `` plain smart '' for its huge promotional value . 
Mr. Pilson calls that loss estimate `` wildly inaccurate , '' conceding only that CBS will lose money on baseball in the first year . 
`` It 's too early to tell '' what happens after that , he says . 
But Mr. Tisch expects losses in all four years of the contract , he told U.S. senators last June . 
CBS will pay an average of $ 82 million more each year than ABC and NBC had paid together -- and those two networks expect losses on baseball this season . 
Yet CBS will air only 12 regular-season games , 26 fewer than ABC and NBC . 
That has outraged some fans . 
It also indicates a $ 50 million drop in ad sales for regular-season games -- a risk CBS took to get an unprecedented lock on all playoff games . 
If the playoffs end in four-game sweeps , losses could soar . 
Advertisers are resisting higher prices , which would help close the gap . 
CBS signed General Motors and Toyota to be the only auto-maker sponsors in baseball for four years . 
Price : $ 265 million . 
But ad executives who negotiated the deal say that works out to only $ 275,000 for a 30-second ad in the World Series through 1993 -- 17 % less than what ABC is charging for the Series this month . 
Moreover , `` there 's no question ad rates will come down considerably '' from the GM-Toyota price , says Arnold Chase of Bozell Inc . 
Other admen , however , say rates could rise later if ad spending surges . 
The Winter Games outlook also is mixed . 
CBS expects to make modest profits , but rivals contend that it will take a beating . 
ABC lost $ 75 million on the 1988 Winter Games , partly because of its $ 309 million rights fee . 
It aired 94.5 hours of mostly live events in Calgary -- helping raise ratings slightly from 1984 -- but still failed to deliver the audience promised to advertisers . 
CBS will add 25 1\/2 hours to that load in 1992 , and ratings could be hurt by a lack of live events . 
All prime-time fare will be on tape-delay because of time differences with Norway , so the results can be announced on the 6 o'clock news . 
( Turner Broadcasting will pay CBS $ 25 million to air 50 hours of CBS coverage plus 50 hours of additional events . ) 
Barry Frank , the agent who took Mr. Pilson to lunch last March , says that even if CBS loses , say , $ 10 million , it matters little . 
`` Ten million ai n't jack , man , when you got $ 3 billion sitting in the bank , '' says Mr. Frank , senior vice president at International Management Group , citing CBS 's enormous cash reserves from selling off various businesses . 
`` It does n't mean anything -- it 's public-relations money . '' 
Moreover , sports has `` claimed its place '' as a guaranteed ratings-getter , says David J. Stern , the commissioner of the National Basketball Association . 
`` This is n't outlandish bidding ; this is a situation of very careful businessmen making judgments about the worth of product and acting on it ... . 
I would tend to trust their judgment . '' 
That 's easy for him to say : CBS 's four-year NBA pact , now at $ 176 million for four years , could double in price by the time his talks with Mr. Pilson are completed later this month . 
That would cut into CBS 's slim margin for profit -- and error . 
CBS Sports earned $ 50 million or so last year . 
And CBS takes in the least money in prime time ; ABC and NBC charge 30 % to 35 % more for ads , according to a Variety survey . 
But CBS 's costs are huge , and the risks go up with each new sports package that CBS locks up . 
Although sports officials predict jumps of 50 % to 100 % in the major contracts coming up for renewal , ad rates may rise only 20 % . 
CBS hopes to save money by ordering fewer episodes of regular series because sports will fill up a few weeks of prime time . 
But the savings will be minuscule . 
Each hour of Olympics and baseball in prime time will cost CBS $ 2.6 million to $ 2.8 million ; an hour-long drama costs only $ 900,000 , and it is aired twice . 
CBS may cushion losses with about $ 200 million a year in interest earned on the proceeds from selling CBS Records and other businesses . 
But media-stock analyst Richard J. MacDonald of MacDonald Grippo Riely says Wall Street wo n't take kindly to that . 
`` On a stand-alone basis , the network ought to make money , '' he says . 
When Mr. Pilson is asked directly -- can you make money on all this ? -- he does n't exactly say yes . 
`` What you 're really asking is , Are the profit and loss margins anticipated on the events acceptable to management ? '' he says . 
Then , he answers his own question . 
`` Yes , they are . 
That 's the only question we need to address . 
Place a phone order through most any catalog and chances are the clerk who answers wo n't be the only one on the line . 
Bosses have big ears these days . 
Or open up an electronics magazine and peruse the ads for sneaky tape recorders and other snooping gadgets . 
Some would make even James Bond green with envy . 
Eavesdropping -- both corporate and private -- is on the rise , thanks to the proliferation of surveillance technologies . 
And while sellers of the equipment and companies `` monitoring '' employees have few qualms , right-to-privacy advocates and some lawmakers are alarmed . 
`` New technologies are changing the way we deal with each other and the way we work , '' says Janlori Goldman , a staff attorney at the American Civil Liberties Union . 
`` Our expectation of confidentiality is being eroded . '' 
On the corporate side , companies claim that monitoring employee phone conversations is both legal and necessary to gauge productivity and ensure good service . 
The practice is common at catalog , insurance and phone companies , banks and telemarketers , according to trade groups and worker organizations . 
It 's also widespread for reservations clerks in the airline , car-rental , hotel and railroad industries . 
The Communications Workers of America , which opposes such monitoring , says supervisors listen in on an estimated 400 million calls each year . 
Among companies saying they monitor employees are United Airlines , American Airlines , United Parcel Service , Nynex Corp. , Spiegel Inc. , and the circulation department of this newspaper . 
Some Wall Street firms monitor for recordkeeping purposes . 
Dictaphone Corp. says there 's a big business demand for its voice-activated taping systems , whether the sophisticated Veritrac 9000 system , which costs from $ 10,000 to $ 120,000 and can record 240 conversations simultaneously , or simple handheld units selling for $ 395 . 
Businesses `` want to verify information and ensure accuracy , '' says John Hiltunen , Dictaphone 's manager of media relations . 
The state of Alaska recently bought the Veritrac system , he says , `` to monitor the Exxon cleanup effort . '' 
Merrill Lynch & Co. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. say they use voice-activated systems to record and verify orders between salesmen and traders . 
Shearson says it has taped some of its institutional trading desks , such as commodities and futures , for about four years . 
Both companies stress that employees know they are being recorded and that customer conversations are n't taped . 
Kidder Peabody & Co. says it monitors bond-trading conversations between brokers and customers to safeguard order accuracy . 
Eavesdropping by individuals is harder to measure . 
But devices are there for the asking , whether in stores or through the mail . 
The Counter Spy Shop in Washington , D.C. , for instance , offers the `` Secret Connection '' attache case , which can surreptitiously record conversations for nine hours at a stretch . 
That and other fancy gizmos may cost thousands , but simple voice-activated tape recorders sell for as little as $ 70 at electronics stores like Radio Shack . 
The most common use of spying devices is in divorce cases , say private investigators . 
While tape recordings to uncover , say , infidelity are n't admissible in court , they can mean leverage in a settlement . 
Concerned with the increased availability of surveillance technology and heavier use of it , lawmakers have proposed laws addressing the issue . 
Nine states have introduced bills requiring that workers and customers be made aware of monitoring . 
And four states -- California , Florida , Michigan and Pennsylvania -- have adopted rules that all parties involved must consent when phone calls are recorded . 
Two bills in Congress hope to make such restrictions national . 
In May , Rep. Don Edwards ( D. Calif . ) introduced congressional legislation that would require an audible beeping during any employee monitoring , warning people that they are being heard . 
( The legislation is similar to a 1987 `` beeper bill '' that was defeated after heavy lobbying by the telemarketing industry . ) 
Also last spring , Rep. Ron Dellums ( D. , Calif. ) , introduced a bill requiring universal two-party consent to any tapings in cases that do n't involve law enforcement . 
In addition , products such as voice-activated tape recorders would have to include beep tones and labels explaining federal laws on eavesdropping . 
The outlook on both federal bills is uncertain , especially remembering the 1987 defeat . 
The ACLU and worker organizations back tighter laws , but employers and device manufacturers object . 
`` I 'm sympathetic with workers who feel under the gun , '' says Richard Barton of the Direct Marketing Association of America , which is lobbying strenuously against the Edwards beeper bill . 
`` But the only way you can find out how your people are doing is by listening . '' 
The powerful group , which represents many of the nation 's telemarketers , was instrumental in derailing the 1987 bill . 
Spiegel also opposes the beeper bill , saying the noise it requires would interfere with customer orders , causing irritation and even errors . 
Laura Dale , center manager at the catalog company 's customer order center in Reno , Nev. , defends monitoring . 
`` We like to follow up and make sure operators are achieving our standards of company service , '' says Ms. Dale , who supervises 350 operators . 
John Bonomo , a Nynex spokesman , says the telephone company needs to monitor operators to evaluate performance during the first six months on the job . 
`` Sometimes , '' he says , `` we 'll pull someone off the phones for more training . '' 
Federal wiretap statutes recognize the right of employers to monitor employees ' for evaluation purposes . 
And in the past , Congress has viewed monitoring as an issue best handled in union negotiations . 
But opponents , led by the CWA , say new laws are needed because monitoring is heavily concentrated in service industries and 81 % of monitored workers are n't represented by unions . 
The CWA claims that monitoring not only infringes on employee privacy , but increases stress . 
`` Nine to Five , '' a Cleveland-based office workers organization that supports the beeper bill , six months ago started a privacy hot line to receive reports of alleged monitoring abuses . 
Meanwhile , supporters of the Dellums two-party consent bill say it is needed because of a giant loophole in the one-party consent law . 
Currently , if the person taping is a party to the conversation , it 's all right to record without the knowledge of the other person on the line . 
( Intercepting other people 's private conversations is illegal and punishable by five years in prison and fines of $ 10,000 . ) 
The electronics industry is closely following the Dellums bill . 
Some marketers of surveillance gear -- including Communication Control System Ltd. , which owns the Counter Spy Shop and others like it -- already put warning labels in their catalogs informing customers of the one-party law . 
But vendors contend that they ca n't control how their products are used . 
Radio Shack says it has a policy against selling products if a salesperson suspects they will be used illegally . 
`` Everything sold at Radio Shack has a legal purpose , '' says Bernard Appel , president of the Tandy Corp. subsidiary . 
He says he has n't yet studied the Dellums bill , but that requiring a beeping tone on recorders `` would be ludicrous . '' 
Still , Radio Shack is aware that some of its products are controversial . 
A few years ago , the company voluntarily stopped selling `` The Big Ear , '' a powerful microphone . 
With its ability to pick up rustlings and flapping wings , `` it was meant to be a toy for children for bird watching , '' says Mr. Appel . 
`` But we were getting too many complaints that people were using them to eavesdrop on their neighbors . '' 
The hottest rivalry in the computer industry intensified sharply yesterday as Digital Equipment Corp. announced its first line of mainframe computers , targeting International Business Machines Corp. 's largest market . 
IBM fired back with new mainframes of its own , extending the long-dominant 3090 line with a 7 % to 14 % power boost . 
Up to now , the intense competition between IBM and Digital has been confined largely to the broad midrange of the computer market , where Digital sought to exploit IBM 's weaknesses in networking . 
But Digital 's move into mainframes will target IBM 's home turf , where it has a commanding 70 % share of the market . 
Digital , Maynard , Mass. , insisted yesterday that its marketing focus would differ sharply from IBM 's . 
`` This is not your father 's mainframe , '' said Allan McGuire , a Digital spokesman . 
`` It 's a whole new generation , '' he said . 
IBM , which gets about half its revenue and more than half its profit from mainframes , also announced upgraded operating system software that , together with the new hardware , lets customers do so-called batch processing as much as 60 % faster . 
Batch processing is the high-volume , single-job data processing that most mainframes typically chug through at night , such as updating accounts at banks . 
IBM said the 16 new J and JH models will generally be available immediately , though three wo n't ship until the third quarter of next year . 
Prices on the larger models , which range as high as $ 13 million , generally wo n't change . 
Small models , whose performance increased as much as 46 % , will carry higher prices . 
Upgrades to bigger models also will be costlier . 
Digital 's VAX 9000 mainframes , which it claimed were among the fastest available , were priced from $ 1.2 million to $ 3.9 million , sharply lower than IBM models of comparable power . 
The first models will ship in the spring , with the largest following in the fall . 
Analysts were disappointed that Digital 's new line apparently wo n't contribute much to earnings before the next fiscal year , which begins in July . 
Jay Stevens of Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. said he may cut his earnings estimate for the current fiscal year because he had expected at least some mainframe profit this year . 
But he added that he expected to raise his estimate for fiscal 1991 at the same time . 
After the announcement yesterday , Digital shares gained $ 1.25 to close at $ 89.875 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
IBM shares closed at $ 103 , down 50 cents , in Big Board trading . 
Analysts have predicted strong pent-up demand for the new line among Digital 's customers . 
Large Digital buyers say the new VAX will let them stay with Digital when they need the power of a mainframe , instead of turning to IBM . 
`` I 'm convinced there 's a huge market for this machine , '' said Stephen Smith of PaineWebber Inc . 
Digital also plans to compete fiercely with IBM when the giant 's customers are computerizing new aspects of their businesses . 
Digital , however , does n't expect to displace IBM mainframes that are already installed at big companies . 
In addition to commercial markets , Digital 's new line targets the low end of the engineering and scientific supercomputer market , when it 's packaged with an optional supercharger , known as a vector processor . 
Digital 's push into mainframes comes at a time when its mainstay minicomputer line is under growing pressure from smaller personal computers and workstations that operate on standard operating systems rather than on the proprietary systems that older minicomputers use . 
Although Digital has staked out a major presence in the booming workstation market , profit margins in that market are much slimmer than for mainframes . 
The slow-growing mainframe market also has shown new signs of life lately . 
IBM 's mainframe sales have held up better than expected this year , with analysts estimating they have risen 10 % to 12 % . 
`` Demand for these systems has been very , very strong , '' said Bill Grabe , a senior IBM marketing executive . 
`` We have a good strong backlog for the fourth quarter even without '' the systems that were announced yesterday . 
But the 3090 line is nearly five years old -- which is getting up there in mainframe years -- and its growth is expected to slow in 1990 . 
IBM , Armonk , N.Y. , said it wanted to bring out the mainframes as soon as it could to spark as many sales as possible by the end of the year . 
The fourth quarter is always IBM 's biggest by far , with most sales coming in December as customers seek to use budgets before year end . 
Still , Steve Cohen , an analyst at SoundView Financial Group Inc. , said , `` I do n't see that this will be sufficient to give IBM a significant kick in the fourth quarter . '' 
IBM has already indicated it will have problems in the quarter , partly because of a delay in shipping a high-end disk drive and partly because the strong dollar will cut significantly the value of IBM 's overseas earnings when translated into dollars . 
Some analysts have estimated IBM 's fourth-quarter per-share earnings will fall 10 % to $ 3.57 a share from $ 3.97 a share a year earlier . 
In addition to the new mainframe hardware and software , IBM announced a magnetic-tape system for data storage that it said occupies half as much floor space as older systems but can store five times as much data on a single cartridge . 
That should help IBM address the damage that a resurgent Storage Technology Corp. has inflicted in that market . 
Concord Camera Corp. completed the acquisition of Peter Bauser G.m.b . H. , a West German photographic products distributor . 
Terms were n't disclosed . 
Concord is a camera and photographic products company . 
The Navy awarded Litton Industries Inc. 's Ingalls Shipbuilding division $ 15.5 million for shipyard services on the Aegis cruiser program . 
The award exercises a Navy option to extend a contract given in 1984 . 
The White House called on Congress to attach the proposed capital-gains tax cut to its final deficit-reduction bill , but lawmakers seem likely to balk at the idea . 
Earlier this month , the White House endorsed stripping the controversial tax measure from the bill so that Congress could pass quickly a `` clean '' bill containing only provisions specifically designed to meet federal budget targets under the Gramm-Rudman act . 
But now that Congress has missed the legal deadline for meeting the Gramm-Rudman targets , the White House said it has returned to its original view that a capital-gains cut should be part of the deficit-reduction bill , on which Congress continues to work . 
`` If that does n't happen , then we press forward on another vehicle and a separate vote , '' said press secretary Marlin Fitzwater . 
On Capitol Hill , though , there does n't seem to be sufficient sentiment to pair capital gains and the deficit-reduction bill . 
Texas Rep. William Archer , the ranking Republican on the House Ways and Means Committee said , `` I do n't see how we have the votes '' to place a capital-gains tax cut there . 
Meanwhile , President Bush stepped up his personal lobbying for the capital-gains tax cut . 
The White House said he plans to hold a series of private White House meetings , mostly with Senate Democrats , to try to persuade lawmakers to fall in line behind the tax cut . 
The first meeting yesterday was with 10 Senate Democrats who have expressed an interest in cutting the tax . 
According to some who attended , the senators argued that the president should give the Democratic leaders in Congress a victory of their own to compensate them for allowing the president to win on the controversial capital-gains issue . 
Issues discussed in this context were an increase in the minimum wage and an increase in child-care spending . 
The president was said to have been noncommittal . 
Toshiba Corp. said its new French marketing concern has started operating under the aegis of the company 's West German subsidiary , which formerly handled all sales of Toshiba electronic products in France . 
A recent change in French law , according to Toshiba , permitted formation of the semiconductor marketing arm in Paris . 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. unveiled new optical transmission systems for data , video and voice communications . 
Two products in what the telecommunications giant called a new generation of such equipment are available now , AT&T said , and three others will be introduced in 1990 and 1991 . 
The products are aimed at a market expected to total more than $ 1 billion a year in sales by 1995 , said Morgan Buchner Jr. , vice president of transmission systems for AT&T . 
The products already available are cross-connect systems , used instead of mazes of wiring to interconnect other telecommunications equipment . 
This cuts down greatly on labor , Mr. Buchner said . 
To be introduced later are a multiplexer , which will allow several signals to travel along a single optical line ; a light-wave system , which carries voice channels ; and a network controller , which directs data flow through cross-connect systems . 
AT&T said the products , unlike previous generations , will meet so-called Sonet compatability standards , which AT&T expects to be broadly adopted . 
Sonet , or synchronous optical network , products have more capacity than earlier models . 
`` These products are the heart of our transmission-product line , '' Mr. Buchner said . 
He declined to disclose specific prices , but said each product costs in the tens of thousands , or even hundreds of thousands , of dollars . 
AT&T said it expects to beat to the marketplace two rivals , Northern Telecom Ltd. of Canada and France 's Alcatel N.V. , which also have announced Sonet-based products . 
AT&T predicted strong growth in demand for such products . 
It noted that last July , Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp. of Japan selected AT&T to supply $ 154 million of such equipment over a four-year period starting next year . 
Law firms that have feasted and grown on the revenue from mergers and acquisitions work are feeling the squeeze as that work declines . 
The disarray in the junk-bond market that began last month with a credit crunch at Campeau Corp. and the failure of banks to deliver financing for a leveraged buy-out of United Airlines parent UAL Corp. has reverberated through some of the nation 's largest law firms . 
While it is still too early to tell whether the dearth of takeover activity is only temporary , many lawyers say their firms are bracing for lower revenue from merger work , which has been so lucrative in the past . 
Much of this work was done for higher fees than other legal work and was not generally billed by the hour . 
If deals take longer to complete and there are fewer of them to do , `` you ca n't bill the same kind of premium as when deals took a few weeks from start to finish , '' says one lawyer at a large New York firm . 
`` We 're planning on a rip-roaring year in 1989 , but next year we 'll be another story , '' said Robert Freedman , a partner at Simpson Thacher & Bartlett . 
`` We 're settling down to a less active period . '' 
Lawyers at such firms as Sullivan & Cromwell ; Willkie Farr & Gallagher ; Wachtell , Lipton , Rosen & Katz ; and Fried , Frank , Harris , Shriver & Jacobson all say they , too , have experienced a significant slowdown , particularly during the past few weeks . 
`` Everyone is waiting to see if deals can be done at sensible prices and if money is available , '' said Jack Nusbaum , co-chairman of Willkie Farr . 
`` It 's hard to know right now if the change is fundamental or cyclical . '' 
Some lawyers say the slump , while more obvious in recent weeks , began earlier this year . 
Dennis Block , a partner at the New York firm of Weil , Gotshal & Manges , said that in the first eight months of this year , 89 hostile offers were launched , compared with 157 for the first eight months of 
What 's more , he said , `` transactions are taking a much longer time to conclude and many fall apart for lack of financing '' and more stringent scrutiny by state courts . 
Lawyers also say an erratic stock market and uncertain financing conditions have sharply reduced the number of lucrative big deals likely to be proposed . 
Still , some lawyers say the mergers slowdown has n't affected foreign buyers as much as domestic ones . 
`` We just took another floor for our London offices , '' said Joseph Flom of the New York firm of Skadden , Arps , Slate , Meagher & Flom . 
Davis Polk & Wardwell also said its international clients are keeping mergers and acquisitions partners busy . 
`` European companies are looking to buy American ones , '' said Henry King , the managing partner at that firm . 
`` But the question is whether things people are looking at will actually surface in live transactions in light of the current market conditions . '' 
MURDER THREAT charged in Haas Securities Corp . stock-manipulation trial . 
In the trial of former Haas Securities Chairman Eugene Laff , the defense accused one of the government 's chief witnesses of threatening to kill Mr. Laff . 
Mr. Laff 's attorney , John Lang , filed a memorandum asking that the trial record include a secretly taped conversation in which the witness , Henry Lorin , told a Haas stockbroker that Mr. Laff should be killed . 
The conversation was taped by federal investigators in what Mr. Lang said was an effort to get Mr. Lorin to implicate Mr. Laff . 
In his opening arguments last week in federal court in New York , Mr. Lang told the jury that Mr. Lorin was the `` real master criminal '' behind the stock manipulation , and that Mr. Laff knew nothing about it . 
In March , Mr. Laff was indicted on 15 counts of conspiracy , mail and securities fraud , and obstructing an investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission . 
The government has charged that Mr. Lorin and Mr. Laff were part of a conspiracy to maintain the prices of certain stocks at artificially high prices . 
Mr. Lorin , a stock promoter , pleaded guilty to the stock-manipulation charges in April and agreed to cooperate with the government 's investigation of Mr. Laff . 
During his cross examination of Mr. Lorin , Mr. Lang read from the transcripts of a conversation that was taped Oct. 20 , 1988 . 
Stanley Aslanian , the Haas broker who agreed to carry a hidden microphone during the conversation , also has pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit securities violations in the stock manipulation and agreed to cooperate . 
According to the transcript , Mr. Lorin said Mr. Laff should be killed after Mr. Aslanian told him that information given to Mr. Laff by another conspirator could jeopardize the stock scheme . 
Mr. Lorin then repeated the threat , and Mr. Aslanian urged him not to say such things . 
From the parts of the transcript read by Mr. Lang , it was unclear what exactly Mr. Lorin feared might happen . 
When asked for a copy of the transcript , Mr. Lang said Judge Thomas P. Griesa had instructed him not to release it or the memorandum . 
During the trial , Mr. Lang asked Mr. Lorin whether he had been so upset `` that you considered killing Mr. Laff ? ... 
Is n't it true that you were so worked up that framing Mr. Laff for this crime was the least that you planned for him ? '' 
Mr. Lorin responded , `` No . '' 
When Mr. Lang asked Mr. Lorin whether he had taken steps to have Mr. Laff killed , the witness again said no . 
Peter Lieb , the assistant U.S. attorney prosecuting the case , declined to comment on the trial . 
TRUSTEE WHO MONITORED settlement payments to Dalkon Shield claimants quits . 
Stephen A. Saltzburg , one of five trustees appointed to monitor payments to women injured by the Dalkon Shield intrauterine contraceptive , resigned , citing personal reasons . 
Mr. Saltzburg , who teaches evidence at the University of Virginia School of Law and was a deputy assistant attorney general in the U.S. Justice Department until August , submitted his resignation earlier this month to federal Judge Robert R. Merhige Jr. , in Richmond , Va . 
Judge Merhige is overseeing the bankruptcy-law reorganization of A.H. Robins Co. , the company that manufactured the shield . 
In a letter Monday to Mr. Saltzburg , the judge said he would `` reluctantly '' accept the resignation . 
The $ 2.38 billion Dalkon Shield Claimants Trust was established as part of A.H. Robins ' bankruptcy-reorganization plan to resolve injury claims arising from use of the shield . 
American Home Products Corp. proposes to acquire the company . 
The remaining four trustees on the Claimants Trust have 60 days to nominate a successor to Mr. Saltzburg . 
Judge Merhige will make the appointment . 
CHICAGO LAW FIRM recruits American Express Co. vice president : 
Coffield Ungaretti Harris & Slavin brought in Howard A. Menell as a partner in its Washington , D.C. , office , which opened Oct. 1 . 
For the past six years , Mr. Menell , 43 years old , served as vice president for government affairs at American Express . 
He previously was staff director and counsel for the Senate committee on banking , housing and urban affairs . 
The other lawyer in the office is partner Robert A. Macari , the firm 's legislative director . 
THE PHILADELPHIA law firm of Ballard , Spahr , Andrews & Ingersoll said three partners have joined its business and finance department . 
John Ake , 48 , a former vice-president in charge of legal compliance at American Capital Management & Research Inc. , in Houston , will join Ballard Spahr 's corporate-securities practice . 
Kent Walker , 45 , a former partner at the Philadelphia law firm of Mesirov , Gelman , Jaffe , Cramer & Jamieson , will specialize in antitrust , real estate and mergers and acquisitions . 
Richard L. Sherman , 42 , will advise midsized businesses . 
Mr. Sherman is former deputy general counsel for SmithKline Beckman Corp. , in Philadelphia , now SmithKline Beecham PLC , in London . 
Delmed Inc. 's top two officers resigned and were succeeded by executives of Fresenius USA Inc. and its parent , Fresenius AG , a major Delmed holder that has been negotiating to acquire a controlling stake . 
In addition , Delmed , which makes and sells a dialysis solution used in treating kidney diseases , said negotiations about pricing had collapsed between it and a major distributor , National Medical Care Inc . 
Delmed said Robert S. Ehrlich resigned as chairman , president and chief executive . 
Mr. Ehrlich will continue as a director and a consultant . 
Leslie I. Shapiro , chief operating officer and chief financial officer , also resigned , the company said . 
Mr. Ehrlich was succeeded as chairman by Gerd Krick , a director of Fresenius , a West German pharmaceutical concern . 
Ben Lipps , president of Fresenius USA , was named president , chief executive and chief operating officer . 
None of the officials was available for comment . 
In trading on the American Stock Exchange , Delmed closed at 50 cents , down 6.25 cents . 
Fresenius owns about 42 % of Delmed 's fully diluted common stock . 
The two companies have been discussing a transaction under which Fresenius would buy Delmed stock for cash to bring its beneficial ownership to between 70 % and 80 % of Delmed 's fully diluted common stock . 
The transaction also would combine Fresenius USA and Delmed . 
Under the proposal , Delmed would issue about 123.5 million additional Delmed common shares to Fresenius at an average price of about 65 cents a share , though under no circumstances more than 75 cents a share . 
Yesterday , Delmed said it `` continues to explore the possibility of a combination with Fresenius USA . '' 
It added that it is apparent that any terms of a combination `` would be substantially less favorable than those previously announced . '' 
While the discussions between Delmed and National Medical Care have been discontinued , Delmed will continue to supply dialysis products through National Medical after their exclusive agreement ends in March 1990 , Delmed said . 
In addition , Delmed is exploring distribution arrangements with Fresenius USA , Delmed said . 
Philip L. Hall , president of J. Lawrence Hall Co. , Nashua , was named a director of this thrift holding company , filling a vacancy . 
Kennametal Inc. said it intends to acquire J&L America Inc. for $ 44 million plus a consideration of as much as an additional $ 12 million , payable over five years . 
Kennametal is a carbide-products and cutting-tools company . 
J&L , whose principal offices are in Detroit , is a mail-order distributer of industrial tools and supplies . 
The acquisition is subject to approval by Kennametal 's board . 
Genentech Inc. said third-quarter profit more than doubled to $ 11.4 million , or 13 cents a share , from a depressed 1988 third-quarter performance of $ 5.3 million , or six cents a share . 
Revenue rose 23 % to $ 100 million from $ 81.6 million . 
Net product sales accounted for $ 76 million , up from $ 57.5 million a year earlier . 
Sales of the heart drug TPA were $ 43.6 million , better than last year 's depressed third period when the company sold just $ 29.1 million of the drug . 
But TPA sales fell below levels for this year 's first and second quarter sales of $ 48 million , cooling investors . 
Genentech stock fell 12.5 cents in trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange to $ 20.125 . 
In the nine months , net income slid 21 % to $ 28.4 million , or 33 cents a share , from $ 36 million , or 42 cents a share . 
Revenues climbed 18 % to $ 289 million from $ 245.3 million . 
`` We continue to be on target for ... increasing TPA sales 20 % to 25 % this year , '' said founder and Chief Executive Officer Robert Swanson . 
But some analysts remain sour on the company . 
`` TPA sales are down quarter to quarter . 
Expenses are flat and that 's a good sign . 
There 's contract revenue from { limited research and development } partnerships . 
But I still think the fundamentals are poor , '' said Denise Gilbert , an analyst with Montgomery Securities in San Francisco . 
Genentech faces competition in the cardiac-drug market from SmithKline Beecham PLC 's heart drug Eminase , expected to receive market approval shortly . 
And Genentech is n't likely to have any new products ready for market until at least 1992 , Ms. Gilbert added . 
`` The company 's stock is trading at 40 times next year 's numbers , and that 's too much , '' she said . 
On the plus side , Genentech is benefiting from a lower tax rate due to its research outlays , giving a boost to earnings , she said . 
THE AMERICAN CANCER SOCIETY 'S 1988 costs of fund raising and administration were $ 72.4 million , or 23.2 % of its revenue . 
A chart in last Friday 's special report on personal finance contained an incorrect figure supplied by NonProfit Times , a monthly newspaper covering charities . 
Ryder System Inc. posted a third-quarter net loss of $ 27.6 million , because of an expected $ 57 million after-tax charge and continued weakness in the company 's truck-rental business . 
The loss , which is 38 cents a share , is the transportation services concern 's first quarterly setback in more than a decade and compares with net income of $ 55.3 million , or 68 cents a share , in the year-ago period . 
The previous year 's third quarter included gains on the sale of aircraft by the company 's Aviation Leasing & Services Division . 
Revenue was flat at $ 1.3 billion . 
The latest quarter 's after-tax charge -- which is 75 cents a share -- was related to adjustments to reserves for workers ' compensation claims ; reductions in vehicle fleets , staff and facilities ; and writedowns of assets . 
Although Ryder did n't break out the charge , analysts estimated that the majority of the $ 57 million was linked to workers ' compensation reserves and anticipated losses on the disposal of trucks . 
Many analysts said they were n't surprised that problems in many of Ryder 's lines of business continued to plague the company . 
`` It pretty much confirms what we had been expecting , '' said Anthony Hatch , an analyst at PaineWebber Inc . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Ryder closed at $ 22.25 , down 37.5 cents . 
M. Anthony Burns , Ryder 's chairman and chief executive officer , said : `` We 're constantly trying to find ways to regain the earnings momentum . 
But we 're still at the beginning stages of some of these changes . '' 
He said the fourth quarter will be `` challenging , '' and maintained his conservative forecast that 1990 `` wo n't be a barn burner . '' 
In the nine months , net income fell 79 % to $ 31.1 million , or 33 cents a share , from $ 149.3 million , or $ 1.82 a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue rose slightly to $ 3.8 billion from $ 3.7 billion . 
Robert L. Wood , 37-year-old chief financial officer , was named chairman and chief executive officer of this independent power producer , succeeding Raymond L. Hixson , 63 . 
Mr. Hixson , who resigned effective Jan. 1 for health reasons , remains a director . 
Advanced Medical Technologies Inc. said it purchased 93 % of a unit of Henley Group Inc . 
Advanced Medical paid $ 106 million in cash for its share in a unit of Henley 's Fisher Scientific subsidiary . 
The unit makes intravenous pumps used by hospitals and had more than $ 110 million in sales last year , according to Advanced Medical . 
Maxicare Health Plans Inc. , operating under Chapter 11 bankrupty-law protection , outlined terms of its reorganization plan that calls for creditors and shareholders to receive at least $ 78.8 million in cash and $ 67 million face amount of 10-year , 13.5 % notes . 
The plan , outlined in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission , also calls for creditors and shareholders to receive common stock and warrants in the new company . 
The health-maintenance concern said it reached the agreement with its court-appointed creditors ' committees Sept. 28 , and intends to submit the plan to the bankruptcy court in November . 
Maxicare , which filed for bankruptcy protection March 16 , has total debt of $ 750 million . 
The company has promptly paid all its expenses and obligations since March 16 , a Maxicare spokesman said . 
General unsecured creditors of Maxicare 's continuing operations initially will receive $ 47 million in cash , $ 35 million face amount of senior notes , and 49 % of the new company 's stock . 
Those creditors , whose claims are estimated at about $ 200 million , include doctors and hospitals . 
General unsecured creditors of Maxicare 's discontinued operations , whose claims total $ 110 million , initially will receive $ 17.8 million in cash and $ 10 million in senior notes . 
Maxicare 's public shareholders will receive 2 % of the new company 's stock and warrants entitling them to acquire as much as an additional 5 % of the stock on a fully-diluted basis . 
General unsecured creditors of the parent holding company initially will receive $ 14 million in cash , $ 22 million face amount of senior notes and 49 % of the new company 's stock . 
That group includes banks and bondholders , who have claims of $ 150 million and $ 350 million respectively . 
Maxicare also will guarantee that the banks will realize at least $ 7 million on certain notes pledged to them . 
Maxicare said the plan stipulates that enrollees in the company 's health plans will have valid claims covered in full . 
Those claims , along with priority employee claims , administrative claims , priority tax claims and administrative convenience claims , are expected to total about $ 16 million . 
The plan is subject to approval by the bankruptcy court and others . 
The spokesman said Maxicare hopes to complete the reorganization by early 1990 . 
Birmingham Steel Corp. said that its Emeryville , Calif. , minimill sustained only minor damage from last week 's earthquake . 
Steelmaking resumed Oct. 18 , but the company expects production to be hampered in the next few months by traffic disruptions around the plant and outages for repair to gas and electric power systems . 
The average interest rate rose to 8.337 % at Citicorp 's $ 50 million weekly auction of 91-day commercial paper , or corporate IOUs , from 8.292 % at last week 's sale . 
Bids totaling $ 475 million were submitted . 
Accepted bids ranged from 8.328 % to 8.347 % . 
However , Citicorp said that the average rate fell to 7.962 % at its $ 50 million auction of 182-day commercial paper from 7.986 % at last week 's sale . 
Bids totaling $ 425 million were submitted . 
Accepted bids were all at 7.962 % . 
The bank holding company will auction another $ 50 million in each maturity next Tuesday . 
Hughes Aircraft Co. , a General Motors Corp. unit , said the Intelsat VI commercial communications satellite is set to be launched Friday . 
The satellite , built by Hughes for the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization , is part of a $ 700 million contract awarded to Hughes in 1982 to develop five of the three-ton satellites . 
Italian car manufacturer Fiat said it is n't interested in partnership or industrial cooperation with Swedish auto and aerospace group Saab-Scania AB , which faces heavy losses in its car division . 
Fiat said it 's only interested in technical cooperation with Saab . 
`` We know that Saab is looking for a partner for industrial and financial cooperation , '' Fiat said . 
`` But that partner is n't Fiat . '' 
The Italian auto maker confirmed that it was discussing technical cooperation with Saab , but declined to comment on rumors that it was planning to buy Saab 's car division . 
Fiat 's rejection of partnership with Saab means that the Swedish company , which announced last Friday that its pretax profit for the first eight months plummeted 49 % , will have to look for a partner among other car manufacturers as both Ford Motor Corp. and Fiat have turned down the offer . 
News reports said yesterday that Saab is trying to start negotiations with French automakers Peugeot and Renault . 
ITT Corp. , its insurance business hurt by Hurricane Hugo , reported a 4 % decline in third-quarter net income , despite a 4.2 % rise in revenue . 
ITT also forecast a fourth-quarter blow to earnings from the California earthquake . 
Except for insurance , however , ITT said it expects improved operating earnings `` in all of our businesses for the full year . '' 
Third-quarter net income dropped to $ 221 million , or $ 1.55 a share , from $ 230 million , or $ 1.60 a share , in the year-earlier period . 
ITT bought back 8.8 million shares this year , including 2.8 million during the third quarter . 
Third-quarter revenue rose to $ 4.9 billion from $ 4.7 billion . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , ITT common stock fell 62.5 cents to close at $ 58.75 a share . 
In addition to insurance and finance , ITT has interests in electronic parts , defense technology , automotive parts , fluid technology , pulp and timber , and communications and information services . 
`` Hurricane Hugo losses and the continuing industrywide downturn in the property and casualty insurance business were the major factors affecting quarterly comparisons , '' said Rand V. Araskog , chairman and chief executive officer . 
ITT 's Hartford Insurance Group had a $ 53 million quarterly pretax loss from Hurricane Hugo , ITT said . 
Hartford expects to report a further pretax loss of about $ 30 million for the current quarter , as a result of the California earthquake this month , ITT added . 
The company also disclosed its financial operations had increased reserves for bankrupt accounts , resulting in a $ 40 million pretax charge for the third quarter . 
This charge was partly offset , however , by $ 19 million in pretax capital gains . 
ITT also said its consumer finance unit agreed in September to settle a civil suit with the California attorney general over alleged improper lending and sales practices . 
Anticipating this settlement , the company recorded a pretax charge of $ 24 million during the fourth quarter of 1988 . 
An ITT spokesman said the charge was n't publicly reported at the time . 
`` The company 's product businesses , with the exception of electronic components , had higher operating earnings for the first nine months of 1989 , '' the company said . 
Elaborating on the exception , it said volume and margins were lower in semiconductor and power systems operations . 
Amoco Corp. said it plans to install two platforms and drill as many as 22 wells to develop oil reserves it discovered in the Atlantic Ocean about 25 miles off the coast of Congo . 
Amoco , an energy concern , is the operator of the project with a 43.75 % working interest , and other partners include Hydro Congo , the Congolese state oil company , with a 50 % interest , and Kuwait Foreign Petroleum Exploration Co. with a 6.25 % stake . 
Production is expected to be about 40,000 barrels of oil a day after completion of the drilling program . 
Jacobs Engineering Group Inc. 's Jacobs International unit was selected to design and build a microcomputer-systems manufacturing plant in County Kildare , Ireland , for Intel Corp . 
Jacobs is an international engineering and construction concern . 
Total capital investment at the site could be as much as $ 400 million , according to Intel . 
The 150,000-square-foot plant will be constructed on a 55-acre site near Dublin . 
Jacobs Engineering officials could n't be reached for comment . 
Bob Evans Inc. said its board authorized the purchase of as many as 500,000 shares of its common . 
The stock , to be purchased on the open market or through privately negotiated transactions , will be held as treasury shares for stock options or other general corporate purposes . 
The program expires April 27 . 
The restaurant operator had 32.2 million shares outstanding as of Sept. 29 . 
Coda Energy Inc. said it completed the sale of Phenix-Transmission Co. to Bishop Pipeline Co. , for $ 17 million in cash and notes . 
Coda , an oil and gas concern , said it and its partners received $ 7 million in cash and $ 10 million in five-year notes for the Kansas intrastate pipeline . 
Coda owned 60 % of the pipeline and private entities owned the rest . 
Bishop is based in Hutchinson , Kansas . 
French consumer prices rose 0.2 % in September from August , according to provisional estimates by the National Statistics Institute . 
The agency noted that because of a strike by Finance Ministry personnel the provisional estimate does n't correspond exactly to the consumer price index usually published . 
The agency noted , however , the estimate will likely be confirmed . 
The institute did n't estimate annual price growth in September , but a 0.2 % rise by the consumer price index would put growth at either 178.8 or 178.9 , up 3.3 % or 3.4 % from the year-earlier level of 173.1 . 
The index was 178.5 in August and is based on 1980 equaling 100 . 
International Technology Corp. and Davy McKee Corp. , a unit of London 's Davy Corp. , said they were awarded a $ 55 million contract by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for the closure of the Helen Kramer Landfill Superfund site in Mantua Township , N.J . 
International Technology , an environmental management concern , said the contract includes construction of slurry walls , gas collection systems , a multilayer cap and water treatment plant . 
U.S. Memories Inc. , the venture that seeks to crack Japan 's domination of the memory-chip market , said it has chosen four potential sites for its operations after a fierce bidding war by 15 states . 
U.S. Memories said it will begin visits during the next several weeks to sites in Austin , Texas ; Colorado Springs , Colo. ; Middletown , N.Y. ; and Phoenix , Ariz . 
Sanford Kane , president , said the finalists were chosen from among 57 locations based on financial , business , and quality of life considerations . 
Conspicuous by its absence is California . 
San Jose and several other California cities mounted major campaigns during the summer to woo the group , which was founded last June by seven electronics concerns . 
The venture plans to announce a final site by late November . 
It expects to begin construction by year end and start shipping four-megabit dynamic random-access memory chips by mid-1991 . 
U.S. Memories investors include Advanced Micro Devices Inc. , Digital Equipment Corp. , Hewlett-Packard Co. , International Business Machines Corp. , Intel Corp. , LSI Logic Corp. , and National Semiconductor Corp . 
Mr. Kane said he expects several other companies to join some time after the venture completes a business plan , probably later this week . 
A seat on the Chicago Board of Trade was sold for $ 390,000 , unchanged from the previous sale Oct. 13 . 
Seats currently are quoted at $ 361,000 bid , $ 395,000 asked . 
The record price for a full membership on the exchange is $ 550,000 , set Aug. 31 , 1987 . 
Dennis R. Mangino , a general manager of EniChem Americas , was named vice president of research and development , a new post at this steel company . 
Fred D. Thompson , a 47-year-old attorney in private practice in Washington and Nashville , Tenn. , was elected to the board of this engineering and construction company . 
The board increased to 11 seats . 
Sun Microsystems Inc. said Prime Computer Inc. has agreed to resell as much as $ 200 million worth of Sun 's machines over the next two years . 
The computers use the company 's own microprocessor called Sparc , Sun said . 
Quickview Systems Inc. said it filed a lawsuit against Apple Computer Inc. , claiming patent infringement in an element of Apple 's popular HyperCard software program . 
The suit , filed in Minneapolis federal court , claims that Apple violated a Quickview patent that allows computer users to display `` only portions of multiple fields on a computer screen with the ability to see the entire contents of any given field . '' 
The HyperCard program allows users to design applications for Macintosh computers without having to be hardcore programmers and is distributed with every Macintosh sold . 
It 's one of the most popular computer programs of all time , but analysts said the Quickview suit does n't appear to bode major difficulties for Apple . 
The technology at issue `` is not an underlying technology of HyperCard to my knowledge , '' said Danny Goodman , a San Francisco-area HyperCard program developer . 
Nonetheless , the suit seeks unspecified damages that an attorney for Quickview claimed could run into the millions of dollars . 
In Cupertino , Calif. , Apple said that it believes the case has no merit , and that HyperCard does not infringe `` any valid claims '' of the Quickview patents . 
It said it filed an action of its own in federal court in San Jose , Calif. , seeking a declaration that Quickview 's claims are invalid . 
This is in response to Atsushi Kageyama 's Manager 's Journal , `` Looking for the Real Thing in Sony '' ( editorial page , Oct. 2 ) . 
Though I agree with many of Mr. Kageyama 's comments , I believe he points the gun in the wrong direction : It is n't the Americans who must be criticized for not understanding the Japanese culture , but the Japanese who insist on forcing their culture on Americans . 
The Japanese want us to accept their culture , but they refuse to accept the American culture . 
Japanese managers ca n't expect Americans to behave as if they were Japanese ; instead , they must manage Americans as Americans . 
Americans are expected to conform to the Japanese culture when in Japan . 
What is wrong with expecting the Japanese to conform to American norms when they locate here ? 
Americans place native or native speakers in charge of subsidiaries overseas . 
European multinationals do likewise ; even in America , their affiliates are usually run by American managers . 
But the Japanese insist upon Japanese managers everywhere they set up shop . 
Do the Japanese feel so superior that they can not find capable American managers ? 
Paul A. Herbig Indiana University Bloomington , Ind . 
Mr. Kageyama suggests that Kotobuki Electronics Industries workers were having difficulty understanding their foreign bosses ' perspective . 
While Mr. Kageyama does an excellent job of explaining the differences , both cultural and philosophic , I question his perspective . 
Would he suggest that employees of an American company doing business in Japan conform to their new bosses ' culture and philosophy ? 
Obviously not . 
Thus the conclusion is that the burden rests with management to understand / adopt the culture and philosophy of the country in which they are operating . 
The workers can be motivated , and the company reach its full potential , only when management embraces the employees ' perspective . 
A. Lawton Langford President Municipal Code Corp . Tallahassee , Fla . 
I believe Mr. Kageyama left out one major aspect of Japanese culture that permeated his piece : the belief in the superiority of Japanese culture and behavior vs. others . 
A manager should not have to rebut the opinions of his employees about the style of his management . 
Instead , he should listen to see how that criticism can be used constructively to advance his objective of carrying out a set of tasks through the efforts of his subordinates . 
Japanese culture vs. American culture is irrelevant . 
The key is how a manager from one culture can motivate employees from another . 
For Mr. Kageyama to argue that American employees must passively accept a direct imposition of the Japanese way of doing things is outright cultural chauvinism of the first order . 
The Japanese are neglecting the opportunity to synthesize a new corporate culture based on a fusion of the best aspects of both national cultures . 
Mr. Kageyama is accurate to deny a specific anti-American bias . 
It is more difficult to deny a general bigotry in seeing things only the Japanese way . 
When the response to criticism is only a better explanation of policies without altering the reasons for the criticism , I am convinced that Mr. Kageyama has still failed to attack the root cause of the problem and is simply treating symptoms . 
Norman L. Owens Tempe , Ariz . 
Cie . Generale des Eaux reported that net profit climbed 30 % in the first half of 1989 and said that it expects a gain of about 25 % for the full year . 
The French water treatment group said consolidated net profit after payments to minority interests rose to 749 million francs ( US$ 119.2 million ) from 575 million francs in the first half of 1988 . 
Revenue climbed 13 % to 45.4 billion francs from 40.1 billion . 
Generale des Eaux said the earnings gain was led by its water , energy and building activities . 
As a presidential candidate in 1980 , George Bush forthrightly expressed his position on abortion in an interview with Rolling Stone magazine published that March . 
What did he think of the Supreme Court 's decision legalizing abortion ? 
`` I happen to think it was right , '' Mr. Bush said flatly . 
A few months later , Mr. Bush became Ronald Reagan 's running mate . 
Suddenly , George Bush the pro-choice advocate became George Bush the anti-abortionist . 
And the vacillation did n't end there . 
Just a month ago , Mr. Bush sternly threatened to veto a pending welfare bill if it provided any abortion funds , except to save a woman 's life . 
Then , two weeks ago -- declaring that `` I 'm not looking for any conflict over this '' -- the president said he would consider a compromise to fund abortions for poor women in cases of rape and incest . 
But only four days after that , Mr. Bush resurrected the veto threat . 
`` I do not support federal funding for abortions except where the mother 's life is threatened , '' he proclaimed , and finally vetoed the measure last weekend . 
So what does George Bush really believe ? 
The answer is so murky that it is beginning to get this popular president in trouble with each of the increasingly vocal , increasingly powerful sides of the abortion issue . 
The result is mistrust and criticism from all around . 
Anti-abortion forces regard him as at best an uncertain ally . 
`` In all honesty if you ask me , ` Is this man a true believer ? ' I do n't know , '' says John Fowler , head of the Washington-based Ad Hoc Committee in Defense of Life Inc . 
Yet abortion-rights forces remain bitterly critical . 
Douglas Gould , vice president of communications for the Planned Parenthood Federation of America , calls Mr. Bush 's position on the abortion-funding issue `` extremely cruel , '' adding : `` The guy has n't done one thing about prevention . 
He 's totally geared to a punitive position . '' 
Mr. Bush is plainly uncomfortable with the entire abortion question . 
For most of the past nine years , he has striven to convince anti-abortion activists of his stalwart support for their position . 
But ever since the Supreme Court 's Webster vs. Reproductive Health Services decision this year changed the political landscape of the abortion issue , the president seemingly has tried just as hard to avoid saying anything more unless pressed to the wall . 
Many Americans still agonize over their own personal feelings about abortion . 
Mr. Bush 's problem is n't so much that he seems to be agonizing over the issue as it is that he seems to vacillate on it . 
The political risk would be far less if the president drew a firm line and hewed to it , experts insist . 
`` If you have a position , you 're better off to stick with it than to move around very much , '' says Republican strategist John Sears . 
The need for consistency is especially acute for Mr. Bush , who , Mr. Sears maintains , lacks a strong ideological base . 
By his moderate Republican heritage as well as the warnings of political advisers who say the issue is vital to younger voters , the president might seem to have at least some sympathy with abortion-rights arguments . 
Yet he is also firmly bound by his hard-line rhetoric and promises he made to anti-abortion activists during his long pursuit of the White House . 
On many issues -- flag-burning , for instance -- his keen political sensitivities overcome such conflicts . 
But Mr. Bush and his advisers miscalculated the politics of the abortion issue , failing to grasp how dramatically the abortion-rights movement would be aroused following last summer 's Supreme Court decision to restrict those rights in the Webster case . 
`` It was one of the quickest changes in public attitudes I 've ever seen , '' says former Reagan pollster Richard Wirthlin . 
These days , when others raise the subject of abortion , the usually loquacious president can be close-mouthed almost to the point of curtness . 
Ten days ago he was asked to amplify the reasons behind his anti-abortion stance . 
`` My position is well-known and well-stated , '' he replied . 
A close look at his record over the last 15 years suggests that Mr. Bush has well-stated his views -- on all sides of the issue . 
In 1974 , as the U.S. representative to the United Nations , he wrote an introduction to a book on world population in which he boasted of his leadership during his term in Congress in expanding family-planning services for the poor . 
Running for president in early 1980 , he was also quoted as supporting federal funding for abortions in cases of rape , incest and to save the life of the mother . 
In his Rolling Stone interview in 1980 , Mr. Bush volunteered his abortion-rights remarks to contrast himself with his rival , Ronald Reagan . 
In addition to supporting the landmark Roe vs. Wade Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion , Mr. Bush said he opposed the constitutional ban on abortion that Mr. Reagan was promising to promote . 
As Mr. Reagan 's running mate , though , Mr. Bush plunged headlong into the anti-abortion position , endorsing a constitutional amendment outlawing abortion . 
He acknowledged only one difference with Mr. Reagan -- that the amendment ought to have exceptions for rape and incest as well as to save a woman 's life . 
Throughout the early 1980s , Mr. Bush was quoted sometimes supporting federal funding for abortion in cases of rape and incest and sometimes opposing it . 
In April 1986 , then-Vice President Bush had his staff write a letter spelling out that he would support a constitutional amendment banning abortions except in cases of rape , incest and life endangerment , but that he opposed federal funding in all but the latter case . 
At the GOP convention last year , he again came out for an amendment with exceptions for rape , incest and life endangerment . 
His rhetoric gathered momentum as he rolled into office , affirming his `` firm support of our cause '' during an anti-abortion rally three days after his inauguration last January . 
He again urged passage of a constitutional amendment outlawing abortion . 
But when the high court ruled in the Webster case in July , the president began to lower the volume . 
When the ruling was handed down , the vacationing president dispatched Chief of Staff John Sununu to issue a statement and refused to answer questions himself . 
He did later threaten vetoes over legislation restoring the District of Columbia 's right to use its own tax money to fund abortions for poor women and over restoring funding to the United Nations Population Fund . 
But in the months since then , while trying to drum up support for other issues -- such as an anti-flag-burning constitutional amendment -- he has shied away from talking about abortion . 
What few comments he has initiated have been oblique , such as urging `` greater efforts toward the protection of human life '' at a meeting of Catholic lawyers in Boston last month . 
The White House has likewise avoided any involvement in Florida 's recent special legislative session on abortion , which anti-abortion forces had regarded as a key test of their ability to get state lawmakers to toughen abortion restrictions . 
The session failed to enact any new curbs . 
Now , some see Mr. Bush trapped in a position he is neither comfortable with nor able to escape . 
Ken Ruberg , head of the Republican Mainstream Committee , a group of party moderates , observes : `` The administration finds itself in an ideological cul de sac that it will find it difficult -- if not impossible -- to get itself out of . 
Christopher Cox 's Oct. 13 editorial-page article `` Toward More Crippling Lawsuits ... '' misses the point . 
The 1989 Americans With Disabilities Act is about eliminating discriminatory barriers . 
When we look closely at our own history , it is clear that our constitutionally mandated civil rights have evolved not through the goodness of people 's hearts but through legislation and constitutional amendments . 
This is how American women won the right to vote . 
And it is how African-Americans and other minority groups were guaranteed their equal rights as citizens in this nation . 
For the more than 43 million Americans with disabilities , the 1989 Americans With Disabilities Act provides the missing piece . 
Disabled Americans have had their civil rights guaranteed in all federally funded programs since Section 504 was passed as a part of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act . 
The 1989 act simply extends these guarantees to the private sector . 
Those who fear a plethora of suits paralyzing our legal system need only look at the record on the Rehabilitation Act . 
Without legal recourse , there are no guarantees of civil rights for anyone . 
John R. Garrison President National Easter Seal Society 
Ford Motor Co. said it is consolidating control of its Asian operations under a new organization here that will be headed by W. Wayne Booker . 
Ford Asia-Pacific will coordinate the activities of Ford subsidiaries in Japan , Australia , Taiwan and New Zealand and work with Ford business associates throughout the region . 
These functions are currently performed out of Melbourne , Australia , and at Ford 's headquarters in Dearborn , Mich . 
Mr. Booker , executive director of Ford 's Latin America Automotive Operations since December 1988 , was named vice president of Ford Asia-Pacific . 
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. , buoyed by improved operating profit in its tire segment , reported that third-quarter net income rose 11 % to $ 70.5 million , or $ 1.22 a share . 
In the year-ago period , Goodyear had net of $ 63.5 million , or $ 1.11 a share . 
Sales rose slightly to $ 2.68 billion , from $ 2.66 billion . 
Analysts had mixed responses to the results . 
Donald DeScenza , an independent analyst in New Canaan , Conn. , said he was `` impressed with the company 's performance . '' 
He said results were better than he 'd expected and indicate that Goodyear is in the midst of a turnaround from a string of lackluster quarters that have plagued the company for a year . 
However , Harry Millis , an analyst at McDonald & Co. , Cleveland , said Goodyear 's results `` fell at the bottom '' of his range of estimates . 
Excluding an increase in the tax rate and the effects of foreign currency translations , Mr. Millis said the company 's results `` were still a little disappointing . '' 
Goodyear 's stock , which has been weak in recent weeks , fell $ 2.875 yesterday to close at $ 43.875 a share in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
The Akron , Ohio-based company said pretax operating income in its tire segment jumped about 31 % to $ 196.2 million from $ 150.2 million a year earlier , reflecting improvements in raw material costs , sales of replacement tires and pricing . 
McDonald 's Mr. Millis said Goodyear appeared to have held or gained some market share in the U.S. for the first time since the second quarter of 1988 . 
But Goodyear said total U.S. tire unit sales were off about 2 % . 
Total tire segment sales were up only about 1 % to $ 2.2 billion , and the company said it reduced manufacturing levels at some of its U.S. tire plants because of inventory adjustments and slackened production by auto makers . 
In the latest quarter , Goodyear 's tax rate was 51 % compared with 41 % a year earlier . 
As a result , total tax outlays were $ 73.5 million , compared with $ 44.1 million the year earlier . 
For the nine months , profit skidded about 35 % , reflecting charges taken in this year 's second quarter and the effect of translations of weaker foreign currencies into the stronger U.S. dollar . 
Net was $ 192.1 million , or $ 3.33 a share , compared with net of $ 293.7 million , or $ 5.13 a share , the year earlier . 
The latest nine months included charges of $ 95 million related to the company 's South African subsidiary and unused pipe sold by its crude oil pipeline unit . 
Sales rose nearly 2 % to $ 8.13 billion from $ 7.98 billion . 
Environmental Control Group Inc. said it expects to report `` minimal '' earnings or a loss for the third quarter . 
The environmental services company said that the discontinuation of unsuccessful product lines and an increase in baddebt reserves probably will result in charges of $ 2.5 million to $ 4 million , most of which will be taken against third-quarter results . 
In the year-ago quarter , the company reported earnings of $ 2.2 million , or 35 cents a share . 
Former USX Corp. Chairman David M. Roderick may have been lucky he retired last May . 
As he handed over the reins to successor Charles A. Corry , steel profits were close to a cyclical peak . 
Though imports were troublesome , they were n't running away with the market , and American companies had high hopes that steel import quotas would be extended for another five years . 
Perhaps most important , Carl Icahn , who had once threatened a hostile takeover bid , was subdued . 
He and Mr. Roderick were even dining out together . 
Today , Mr. Corry presides over a company whose fortunes have changed abruptly . 
Mr. Icahn , the company 's deep-pocketed , tenacious adversary , recently disclosed that he had raised his USX stake to 13.1 % , and he again threatened a takeover . 
A battle with Mr. Icahn would rattle even the most seasoned chief executive , to say nothing of one who took the helm less than five months ago . 
In addition , USX 's giant steel segment , representing 34 % of its 1988 sales , is facing softening demand and slipping prices as well as increasing competition from foreign steelmakers and low-cost minimills . 
The import quotas got only a 2 1 / 2-year extension , and USX is laboring under a staggering $ 5.8 billion debt at a time when it must spend money to upgrade steel mills and drill for oil . 
`` It 's a baptism of fire for Corry , '' says one USX executive . 
The burning question is whether the new chief can parry Mr. Icahn without being pushed into unwelcome moves . 
Mr. Corry might have to dismember the company more than he wants to . 
Or he might have to incur a huge expense of either buying Mr. Icahn 's stock , possibly at a premium , or paying stockholders a special dividend partly because of Mr. Icahn 's pressure . 
With his recent purchases of USX common stock , Mr. Icahn shattered a three-year-old , unwritten standstill agreement with Mr. Roderick . 
In 1986 , Mr. Roderick adroitly dodged Mr. Icahn 's first bullet after the takeover specialist had built up an 11.4 % stake . 
Mr. Roderick did so by having USX redeem a series of guaranteed notes , a move that , in effect , raised the cost of a $ 7.19 billion Icahn bid by about $ 3 billion . 
And he managed to fend off further advances and even strike up an unlikely friendship with the interloper . 
Over dinners at New York 's Sky Club and Links Club restaurants , the steel executive and the big investor talked steel , international trade and thoroughbred horses . 
Mr. Corry , who has boned up on corporate raiders by reading T. Boone Pickens 's autobiography , had hoped the detente would continue . 
He was shocked , associates say , to learn of Mr. Icahn 's new takeover threat . 
( Both men declined to be interviewed for this article . ) 
But the fiercely competitive Mr. Corry quickly showed he 's no pushover . 
He huddled with directors at a special meeting two weeks ago and tried to block his opponent . 
Although the board believed that Mr. Icahn is more interested in talking the stock price higher than acquiring USX , it adopted a poison-pill defense , to be swallowed if anyone amasses a 15 % stake . 
Now , it 's Mr. Icahn 's move . 
Will he try to gain a seat on or control of the board and force a radical split of USX into separate oil and steel companies ? 
Given the weakness of the junk-bond market , can he finance a buy-out ? 
Mr. Icahn may not want to sell out unless he can get a special dividend similar to one he received before selling his stake in Texaco Inc. in June -- a coup that gave him enough cash to make his USX move . 
And although the recent turmoil in the stock and junk-bond markets , by making it harder to arrange takeover financing , has eased some of the pressure on Mr. Corry , it does n't end the takeover threat . 
`` I know it 's not over , '' a sober-faced Mr. Corry acknowledged while greeting steel suppliers in New York on Oct. 12 and inviting them to a buffet of salmon and sushi in honor of Kobe Steel Ltd. , USX 's partner in a steel mill in Lorain , Ohio . 
In fact , it 's barely begun for Mr. Corry , who faces tough decisions before he has had a chance to get settled into his new job . 
`` He 's in a vulnerable position because he has n't established much credibility on his own , '' says Bryan Jacoboski , a securities analyst at PaineWebber Inc . 
The 57-year-old tax attorney never even aspired to the job of chief executive . 
An undistinguished college student who dabbled in zoology until he concluded that he could n't stand cutting up frogs , Mr. Corry wanted to work for a big company `` that could do big things . '' 
But after joining the tax department of a USX subsidiary 30 years ago , he set the modest goal of becoming tax manager by the age of 46 . 
For years , he quietly stuck to the back accounting rooms , wearing a hat to work because everyone else did . 
`` I was never a rebel , '' he said in an earlier interview . 
`` I do n't think most of the people that have been around me would ever say they 've seen me pound the table or get angry . '' 
Yet , the unassuming Mr. Corry helped chart USX 's transition from Big Steel to Big Oil . 
He served as Mr. Roderick 's front man in tense negotiations for the 1982 purchase of Marathon Oil for $ 5.9 billion . 
Nevertheless , Mr. Corry , once named chief executive , did n't waste any time distancing himself from his former boss , who still has an office on the 62nd floor of the USX tower in Pittsburgh . 
Soon after taking over last June , Mr. Corry rescinded a pay cut imposed on clerical workers , a move that Mr. Roderick had n't made in spite of improved earnings . 
Mr. Corry also ruled that all board meetings would be held in Pittsburgh instead of New York or Findlay , Ohio , Marathon 's home . 
And , earlier this month , he announced the sale of the reserves of Texas Oil & Gas , which was acquired three years ago and has n't posted any significant operating profits since . 
One former executive says , `` Nobody wanted that deal inside USX except Dave Roderick , '' who was a hunting and fishing buddy of William L. Hutchison , chairman of Texas Oil & Gas . 
The executive recalls Mr. Corry whispering to him and others , `` Remember , this was Dave 's deal . '' 
What miffed many USX executives and shareholders was that the acquisition , for $ 3 billion of stock , doubled the USX shares outstanding and considerably diluted them . 
What 's more , the takeover occurred as natural-gas prices were falling and just as Texas Oil & Gas reported its first annual loss in 28 years . 
Mr. Corry expected the Texas Oil & Gas sale to delight Mr. Icahn by addressing his concern about boosting shareholder value . 
But when the two men met in New York a day after Mr. Icahn disclosed the rise in his USX stake , Mr. Corry learned that Mr. Icahn wanted him to sell all of Texas Oil -- not just its reserves of about 1.2 trillion cubic feet of natural gas and 28 million barrels of oil but also its pipeline , gas-gathering and contract-drilling operations . 
That would leave USX with Marathon , its steel mills and its diversified business segment , which includes , among other things , mineral and transportation products . 
Some speculate that Mr. Corry would agree if he could find a buyer at the right price . 
The problem is that Mr. Icahn is pushing him to move faster and further in restructuring USX than Mr. Corry had planned . 
Mr. Icahn has long believed , associates say , that the company , whose 1988 sales totaled $ 16.88 billion , is worth $ 70 a share if broken up . 
The stock closed yesterday at $ 33.625 , giving Mr. Icahn 's 33.6 million shares a value of $ 1.13 billion . 
Mr. Icahn advocates the sale of the company 's steel operations , and Mr. Corry does n't necessarily disagree . 
Unlike his predecessor , who saw steel as America 's backbone , Mr. Corry tends to view it as a capital-draining and labor-intensive business with limited potential , associates say . 
In the past five years , USX has turned steel into a profit maker by closing several plants and reducing labor costs . 
But the short-term outlook is so-so . 
It is n't surprising that Messrs. Roderick and Corry view steel so differently . 
While Mr. Roderick was reared in the shadows of Pittsburgh 's smoking mills , Mr. Corry grew up in Cincinnati , a city nicknamed `` Porkapolis '' and more accustomed to pork chops than pig iron . 
He has never met Lynn Williams , the president of the United Steelworkers union , and is n't active in the industry 's main trade group , the American Iron and Steel Institute , which Mr. Roderick served as chairman . 
`` Dave thought the country needed a strong U.S. Steel and , while Chuck agreed , he was more apt to say , ` Not at any cost to shareholders , ' '' a former executive says . 
Indeed , Mr. Corry , at an August press conference , talked about investing in steel as long as it provides a good return and `` not a day longer . '' 
However , shedding steel would run directly counter to Mr. Roderick 's original rationale for diversifying into oil and gas : Having two major products would lessen the company 's vulnerability to one market 's down cycle and help smooth out the flow of cash and earnings . 
As Mr. Roderick once said : `` We 're a two-product company and , boy , if you ca n't figure out the value of those two parts , you are so damn dumb that you do n't belong on Wall Street . '' 
Moreover , the opportunity to sell steel at a price acceptable to USX may be gone , for now . 
`` The time has passed for us to spin off steel , '' either in a public offering or to a buyer , one executive contends . 
About the only way that USX now can get out of steel is to dish it out , piece by piece , in separate joint ventures , he adds . 
With Mr. Icahn breathing down his neck , however , Mr. Corry may have little choice but to sell at a weak price , even if it means losing some steel-related tax-loss carryforwards . 
That would leave USX essentially an oil company with Marathon as its core . 
Marathon has benefited from higher crude-oil prices and strong demand for refined products . 
Oil has long been Mr. Corry 's pet . 
Indeed , when the Bush administration finally decided this summer to renew import restrictions -- arguably the most important decision to affect the steel industry in five years -- Mr. Corry and his directors were aboard helicopters , high above Marathon 's rich oil reserves in the North Sea . 
Should USX be left with only Marathon , Mr. Corry might well feel pushed to scout out other energy companies . 
However , even USX executives who work closely with him are n't sure about his long-term goals . 
`` I do n't think he has a clear sense of where he wants the company to go , '' one says . 
Right now , the executive adds , `` he wants to continue to focus on paying down '' USX 's debt by selling assets . 
One thing is certain , however : Mr. Corry , while studying other options , probably wo n't make a major move until he 's clear about Mr. Icahn 's intentions . 
And then , `` he wo n't panic , '' says J. Bruce Johnston , a former USX executive and now a labor and benefit consultant with Adler Cohen & Grigsby in Pittsburgh . 
Mr. Corry learned presence under fire when , as vice president of corporate planning , he handled what Mr. Johnston calls `` don't-con-me '' negotiations that led to USX 's shedding of a wide array of assets ranging from chemicals to construction . 
When negotiating , Mr. Corry played his cards close to the vest . 
Johnnie Johnson , who worked for Mr. Corry in strategic planning , recalls how his boss would routinely ask a subordinate to research an entire industry to target acquisition candidates . 
`` What he really wanted to know was about a particular company , but you did n't know that . 
He wanted your own unbiased , virgin opinion , '' says Mr. Johnson , now managing director at Georgeson & Co. , a proxy-solicitation and investor-relations firm . 
Ever the pragmatist , Mr. Corry said in August that he realized that USX is on `` acquisition screens all over the country . '' 
`` It 's part of the capitalistic market system that equity can be bought and equity is bought , '' he said . 
USX , he noted , was formed 88 years ago , `` by in effect buying out a bunch of other companies ... . 
People got rich through takeovers in those days , as they do today . '' 
Thomas F. O'Boyle contributed to this article . 
Westinghouse Electric Corp. said it will buy Shaw-Walker Co . 
Terms were n't disclosed . 
Shaw-Walker , based in Muskegon , Mich. , makes metal files and desks , and seating and office systems furniture . 
Israel has launched a new effort to prove the Palestine Liberation Organization continues to practice terrorism , and thus to persuade the U.S. to break off talks with the group . 
U.S. officials , however , said they are n't buying the Israeli argument . 
Israeli counterterrorism officials provided the State Department with a 20-page list of recent terrorist incidents they attribute directly to forces controlled by PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat . 
Mr. Arafat publicly renounced terrorism Dec. 15 , satisfying the U.S. precondition for a direct `` dialogue '' with the PLO . 
A U.S. counterterrorism official said experts are studying the Israeli list . 
`` We have no independent evidence linking Fatah to any acts of terrorism since Dec. 15 , 1988 , '' he said , referring to the specific PLO group that Mr. Arafat heads . 
`` So far , this list does n't change our view . 
Israel wants to end the dialogue , but our analysts take a different view than theirs . '' 
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir 's top adviser on counterterrorism , Yigal Carmon , was here Monday to present the report to members of Congress , reporters and others . 
Mr. Carmon said he also presented the list last week to William Brown , U.S. Ambassador to Israel . 
Separately , the New York Times reported that the Israeli government had provided its correspondent in Jerusalem with different documents that Israel said prove the PLO has been conducting terrorism from the occupied Arab territories . 
The State Department said it has n't yet seen copies of those papers . 
`` If the dialogue was based on the assumption that Arafat or the PLO would stop terrorism , and we have evidence of continued terrorism , what would be the logical conclusion ? '' Mr. Carmon asked . 
Israel has long claimed Mr. Arafat never meant to renounce terrorism , particularly because he and his lieutenants reserved the right to press `` armed struggle '' against the Jewish state . 
Now , Jerusalem says it is backing up its contention with detailed accounts of alleged terrorist acts and plans linked to Mr. Arafat . 
It blames most of these on Fatah . 
The new accusations come at a delicate time in U.S. efforts to bring about talks between Israel and Palestinian representatives . 
The State Department said it had received a new letter on the subject from Israeli Foreign Minister Moshe Arens , restating Israel 's previous objection to negotiating with any Palestinian tied to the PLO . 
Deciding what constitutes `` terrorism '' can be a legalistic exercise . 
The U.S. defines it as `` premediated , politically motivated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational groups or clandestine state agents . '' 
To meet the U.S. criteria , Israel contended it only listed incidents that involved civilians and occurred inside its pre-1967 borders . 
At the heart of Israel 's report is a list of a dozen incidents Jerusalem attributes to Fatah , including the use of bombs and Molotov cocktails . 
But U.S. officials say they are n't satisfied these incidents constitute terrorism because they may be offshoots of the intifadah , the Palestinian rebellion in the occupied territories , which the U.S. does n't classify as terrorism . 
In addition , the officials say Israel has n't presented convincing evidence these acts were ordered by Fatah or by any group Mr. Arafat controls . 
U.S. terrorism experts also say they are highly uncertain about the veracity of the separate documents leaked to the New York Times . 
The papers , which Israel says were discovered in Israeli-occupied Gaza , refer to terrorist acts to be carried out in the name of a group called `` the Revolutionary Eagles . '' 
Some supporters of Israel say U.S. policy on Palestinian terrorism is colored by an intense desire to maintain the dialogue with the PLO . 
But State Department officials accuse Israel of leaking questionable claims to embarrass the U.S. . 
The dollar finished lower yesterday , after tracking another rollercoaster session on Wall Street . 
Concern about the volatile U.S. stock market had faded in recent sessions , and traders appeared content to let the dollar languish in a narrow range until tomorrow , when the preliminary report on third-quarter U.S. gross national product is released . 
But seesaw gyrations in the Dow Jones Industrial Average yesterday put Wall Street back in the spotlight and inspired market participants to bid the U.S. unit lower . 
UAL 's decision to remain an independent company sent share prices tumbling . 
By midmorning , the DJIA had plunged 80 points and foreign-exchange dealers quickly drove the dollar down . 
When the DJIA modestly rebounded , the dollar bounced back in choppy dealings but ended the day below the levels of late Monday . 
Stock prices , meanwhile , posted significant gains in later trading and closed down by only 3.69 points on the day . 
Some dealers said that the market 's strong reaction to Wall Street reflects a general uneasiness about the dollar . 
They added that the DJIA 's swift drop proved an easy excuse for the market to drive the U.S. currency in the direction it was already headed . 
In late New York trading yesterday , the dollar was quoted at 1.8355 marks , down from 1.8470 marks Monday , and at 141.45 yen , down from 141.90 yen late Monday . 
Sterling was quoted at $ 1.6055 , up from $ 1.6030 late Monday . 
In Tokyo Wednesday , the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.57 yen , down from Tuesday 's Tokyo close of 142.10 yen . 
Tom Trettien , a vice president with Banque Paribas in New York , sees a break in the dollar 's long-term upward trend , a trend that began in January 1988 . 
He argues that the dollar is now `` moving sideways , '' adding that `` the next leg could be the beginning of a longer term bearish phase . '' 
Analysts peg the dollar 's recent weakness to an underlying slowdown in the U.S. economy , highlighted by recent economic data , particularly a surprisingly sharp widening in the August U.S. trade gap . 
They also point out that narrowing interest-rate differentials between the U.S. and its major trading partners tend to make the U.S. currency less attractive to foreign investors . 
Despite several spurts of dollar trading , it was noted that mark-yen cross trade grabbed much of the market 's attention . 
Following the dive in U.S. stocks , the mark has strengthened more than its major counterparts . 
Traders attribute the mark 's surge to a robust West German economy and higher rate differentials . 
But , they add that the mark 's strength is in part a reflection of a shift away from U.S. assets by Japanese investors into West German investments . 
`` The question remains : how much can the West German market absorb ? '' says one senior dealer . 
Some dealers say that Bank of Japan Governor Satoshi Sumita 's reassurance that Japanese monetary policy wo n't be changed for the time being has given investors an added excuse to push the yen down even further against the mark . 
Despite the yen 's weakness with respect to the mark , Tokyo traders say they do n't expect the Bank of Japan to take any action to support the Japanese currency on that front . 
Meanwhile , sterling slumped on news that the United Kingdom posted a wider-than-expected trade deficit in September . 
The news also knocked the British unit to below 2.95 marks in London , but a bout of short-covering helped sterling recoup some of its earlier losses . 
On the Commodity Exchange in New York , gold for current delivery jumped $ 3.20 to $ 370.20 an ounce . 
The close was the highest since Aug. 15 . 
Estimated volume was a light two million ounces . 
In early trading in Hong Kong Wednesday , gold was quoted at $ 368.25 an ounce . 
Boston Co. , the upper-crust financial services concern that was rocked by a management scandal late last year , has had a sharp drop in profitability -- mainly because a high-risk bet on interest rates backfired . 
Boston Co. 's fall from grace is bad news for its parent , Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. , which has relied heavily on the banking and money management unit 's contributions in recent years . 
In 1988 , for example , Boston Co. had an estimated pretax profit of at least $ 110 million , while Shearson managed net income of just $ 96 million . 
Shearson does n't break out the earnings of its subsidiaries . 
But people familiar with Boston Co. 's performance say the unit had profit of around $ 17 million for the third quarter , after barely breaking even for the first six months . 
Shearson , meanwhile , posted net income of $ 106 million for the first nine months of the year , down slightly from $ 110 million for the year-ago period . 
Moody 's Investors Service Inc. last week downgraded the long-term deposit rating of Boston Co. 's Boston Safe Deposit & Trust Co. subsidiary , to single-A-1 from double-A-3 , citing problems in the company 's `` aggressively managed securities portfolio . '' 
John Kriz , a Moody 's vice president , said Boston Safe Deposit 's performance has been hurt this year by a mismatch in the maturities of its assets and liabilities . 
The mismatch exposed the company to a high degree of interest-rate risk , and when rates moved unfavorably -- beginning late last year and continuing into this year -- `` it cost them , '' Mr. Kriz said . 
Mr. Kriz noted that Boston Safe Deposit `` has taken some actions to better control asset-liability management and improve controls in general , and we think these will serve to improve credit quality . '' 
As some securities mature and the proceeds are reinvested , the problems ought to ease , he said . 
But he also cited concerns over the company 's mortgage exposure in the troubled New England real estate market . 
Boston Co. officials declined to comment on Moody 's action or on the unit 's financial performance this year -- except to deny a published report that outside accountants had discovered evidence of significant accounting errors in the first three quarters ' results . 
An accounting controversy at the end of last year forced Boston Co. to admit it had overstated pretax profits by some $ 44 million . 
The resulting scandal led to the firing of James N. von Germeten as Boston Co. 's president and to the resignations of the company 's chief financial officer and treasurer . 
The executives were accused of improperly deferring expenses and booking revenue early , in an effort to dress up results -- and perhaps bolster performance-related bonuses . 
Mr. von Germeten , in turn , attributed the controversy to judgmental errors by accountants and accused Shearson of conducting a `` witch hunt . '' 
Mr. Kriz of Moody 's said the problems in the securities portfolio stem largely from positions taken last year . 
The company 's current management found itself `` locked into this , '' he said . 
Mexico exported an average of 1,296,800 barrels of crude oil a day at an average of $ 15.31 a barrel during 1989 's first eight months for a total of $ 4.82 billion , Petroleos Mexicanos S.A. said . 
The state petroleum monopoly said sales in the period gained 15 % , and $ 262.4 million more than originally projected at an average of $ 10 a barrel on an export platform of 1,250,000 barrels a day . 
CHICAGO - 
Sears , Roebuck & Co. is struggling as it enters the critical Christmas season . 
Yesterday , the retailing and financial services giant reported a 16 % drop in third-quarter earnings to $ 257.5 million , or 75 cents a share , from a restated $ 305 million , or 80 cents a share , a year earlier . 
But the news was even worse for Sears 's core U.S. retailing operation , the largest in the nation . 
Sears said its U.S. stores had a loss of $ 6.9 million , their first deficit for the period in more than five years . 
Analysts estimated that sales at U.S. stores declined in the quarter , too . 
The results underscore Sears 's difficulties in implementing the `` everyday low pricing '' strategy that it adopted in March as part of a broad attempt to revive its retailing business . 
Under the new approach , Sears set prices that were somewhere between its old `` regular '' and `` sale '' prices . 
The company said it would resort far less often to slashing prices to woo shoppers . 
Sears officials insist they do n't intend to abandon the everyday pricing approach in the face of the poor results . 
Instead , a spokesman blames the dismal third-quarter showing on `` an environment that is being distorted by a very harsh climate for sales of durable goods , '' which account for roughly two-thirds of Sears 's annual merchandise volume . 
The new pricing strategy `` is working , '' the spokesman asserted . 
He added that , after an initial surge triggered by an advertising blitz in March , Sears expected that the pricing program would n't have any effect on revenue . 
Sears has been counting on growth coming from the large displays of brand-name merchandise it is adding to its stores over the next two years in what it calls `` power formats . '' 
But analysts say Sears faces an especially daunting challenge on the eve of the Christmas shopping season . 
`` I believe everyday pricing in the current environment does n't work , '' says Walter Loeb of Morgan Stanley & Co. , pointing to soft durable-goods sales . 
`` Sears is likely to be unsuccessful if it continues with its pricing policy when everyone else is offering unusual values . '' 
In what amounts to an admission that the transition has n't gone as smoothly as Sears had hoped , the giant retailer is now trying new ways to drum up business without appearing to abandon its seven-month-old strategy . 
The company is highlighting more special deals in its advertising and stores , and it 's offering to defer finance charges on certain big-ticket items . 
Sears is also stepping up its television ads and changing its message . 
In a new TV ad , for instance , a woman going through the Sunday newspaper brands as hype claims by other stores that they are offering goods for `` 50 % , 60 % and 70 % off . 
'' By lowering prices throughout its stores , she says , `` Sears has the right idea . '' 
But the ad also mentions Sears 's sales -- a topic that the retailer has avoided since switching to everyday pricing . 
`` When Sears has a sale at a special price , '' the woman in the ad declares , `` it 's something you do n't want to miss . '' 
Recent surveys by Leo J. Shapiro & Associates , a market research firm in Chicago , suggest that Sears is having a tough time attracting shoppers because it has n't yet done enough to improve service or its selection of merchandise . 
The number of people who said they were more likely to shop at Sears fell in September to 37 % from 66 % in March , when Sears blanketed the airwaves with ads about its new pricing strategy . 
Moreover , the number of people who spontaneously cited lower prices as the reason for their interest in Sears declined to 16 % in September from 33 % in March . 
Just 5 % of the respondents mentioned brands in September , up slightly from 2 % in March . 
Only 2 % of the people in September cited Sears 's `` friendly personnel . '' 
`` The power of price as an appeal , which was very considerable in driving traffic in March and April , has diminished , '' says George Rosenbaum , president of Shapiro & Associates . 
`` You see some improvement in these other areas , but it 's a very small and slow process . '' 
For the third quarter , Sears said its total revenue rose 4.8 % to $ 13.18 billion from $ 12.57 billion a year earlier . 
Net income at Sears 's merchandise group , which includes international and credit card operations , as well as U.S. stores , fell 25 % . 
Profit at Sears 's Allstate insurance unit fell 38 % to $ 126.1 million because of Hurricane Hugo , which inflicted the greatest single storm damage loss in the company 's history . 
Sears said claims from the storm , as expected , reduced its third-quarter net by $ 80 million , or 23 cents a share . 
Allstate is expected to absorb another big hit in the fourth quarter as claims pour in from the San Francisco earthquake . 
But a spokesman said the quake wo n't have as big a financial impact on Allstate as Hurricane Hugo did . 
Net income at Sears 's Dean Witter Financials Services group , meanwhile , rose nearly 32 % to $ 35.7 million , reflecting improvements in its basic stock brokerage and Discover credit card businesses . 
Profit at Sears 's Coldwell Banker Real Estate Group nearly quadrupled to $ 81.2 million because of gains on sales of property . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Sears shares closed at $ 40.50 , up 87.5 cents . 
Oil imports to Japan rose 12 % in September from year-earlier levels , according to statistics released by the government 's Ministry of International Trade and Industry . 
The imports , totaling 98.5 million barrels , were 11 % lower than August levels . 
The year-on-year rise was partly because of higher demand for petroleum products , and partly because of tax changes in 1988 that left oil companies with high inventories in the late-summer / early-FALL PERIOD . 
Imports of crude from the Middle East grew 17 % from year-earlier levels , and Southeast Asian crude imports grew 43 % . 
While Mideast crude imports were higher compared with year-earlier levels , they fell 18 % compared with August imports . 
Southeast Asian crude imports , however , were 3.6 % higher than August . 
This is in response to George Melloan 's Business World column `` The Housing Market Is a Bigger Mess Than You Think '' ( op-ed page , Sept. 26 ) . 
In Houston , we have seen how bad the housing problem can become . 
Unused houses deteriorate rapidly , affecting the value of nearby homes ; in a domino effect , the entire neighborhood can fall victim . 
At this stage some people just `` walk away '' from homes where the mortgage exceeds current market value . 
But most of them could have afforded to keep up their payments -- they chose not to do so . 
The problem is so vast that we need to try innovative solutions -- in small-scale experiments . 
Here are some ideas : 
1 ) Foreclosed homes could be sold by the FHA for no down payment ( the biggest obstacle to young buyers ) , but with personal liability for the mortgage ( no walking away by choice ) . 
2 ) Encourage long-term occupancy by forgiving one month 's payment ( off the tail end of the mortgage ) for every six months paid ; or perhaps have the down payment deferred to the end of the mortgage ( balloon ) , but `` forgiven '' on a monthly pro-rata basis as long as the owner remains the occupant . 
3 ) Develop rental agreements with exclusive purchase options for the renter . 
An occupant will , in most every case , be better for the home and neighborhood than a vacant house . 
In this way , the house is not dumped on to a glutted market . 
John F. Merrill 
Houston 
The Federal Housing Administration , Veterans Administration and the Department of Housing and Urban Development further aggravate the problem of affordable housing stock by `` buying in '' to their foreclosed properties ( of which there are , alas , many ) at an inflated `` balance due '' -- say $ 80,000 on a house worth $ 55,000 -- instead of allowing a free market to price the house for what it 's really worth . 
Worse , the properties then sit around deteriorating for maybe a year or so , but are resold eventually ( because of the attractiveness of the low down payment , etc . ) to a marginal buyer who ca n't afford both the mortgage and needed repairs ; and having little vested interest that buyer will walk away and the vicious cycle repeats itself all over again . 
Paul Padget 
Italy 's unemployment rate rose to 12 % of the labor force in July from 11.9 % in April , and was up from 11.7 % a year earlier , according to quarterly figures from the state statistical institute . 
Istat said a national survey during the first week of July showed the number of job seekers was 2,888,000 up from 2,822,000 in April , and from 2,853,000 a year ago . 
The unemployment rate was by far the highest in the southern , so-called Mezzogiorno region . 
The southern unemployment rate rose to 21.3 % in July from 21.2 % in April and from 20.6 % a year earlier . 
Istat said 369,000 more people were employed in July than in April . 
Xerox Corp. 's third-quarter net income grew 6.2 % on 7.3 % higher revenue , earning mixed reviews from Wall Street analysts . 
Quarter net for the business-machines and financial-services company rose to $ 155 million , or $ 1.41 a share , from $ 146 million , or $ 1.37 a share , in the year-earlier period . 
Revenue rose to $ 4.45 billion from $ 4.15 billion . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Xerox closed at $ 62.75 a share , up $ 1 . 
Sales growth and profit in business products and systems -- Xerox 's main business -- were `` disappointing , '' said B. Alex Henderson , who follows the company for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc . 
Sales of Xerox copiers and other office products grew 1.6 % ; `` we expected growth of 6 % to 7 % , '' Mr. Henderson said . 
Operating-profit margins slipped almost 18 % , to 4.3 % of sales , the analyst noted . 
Still , with competitors such as Eastman Kodak Co. faltering in copier sales , Xerox 's sales increases `` were encouraging , '' says Eugene Glazer of Dean Witter Reynolds Inc . 
`` They are holding their own in a weak market , and the restructuring is working , '' he says . 
David T. Kearns , Xerox chairman and chief executive officer , cited the restructuring and `` strong '' cost controls for the 13 % growth in profit from business products and systems operations . 
Mr. Glazer expects Xerox to experience tough sledding , though , in financial services because of rate pressures and uncertainty surrounding tax treatment of capital gains . 
In the quarter , the Crum & Forster insurance unit reported $ 200 million before tax of capital gains from property and casualty operations . 
The subsidiary also increased reserves by $ 140 million , however , and set aside an additional $ 25 million for claims connected with Hurricane Hugo . 
For the nine months , Xerox earned $ 492 million , or $ 4.55 a share , up 5.8 % from $ 465 million , or $ 4.32 a share . 
Revenue rose 7.6 % to $ 12.97 billion from $ 12.05 billion . 
New orders for durable goods fell back slightly in September after shooting up the month before , reflecting weakening auto demand after a spurt of orders for new 1990 models , the Commerce Department reported . 
Orders for military equipment , household appliances , machinery and other goods expected to last at least three years dipped 0.1 % last month , to $ 126.68 billion , after leaping 3.9 % in August , the department said . 
Most analysts had expected a sharper decline after the steep rise in August . 
Moreover , a recent government report showing widespread layoffs in manufacturing had contributed to perceptions that the manufacturing sector of the economy had slowed to a crawl . 
But many economists pointed to a 1.8 % September rise in orders outside the volatile transportation category . 
That `` suggests the manufacturing sector is not falling apart , '' said Sally Kleinman , an economist at Manufacturers Hanover Securities Corp. in New York . 
She added , however : `` It is not robust by any means . '' 
While a decline in orders for cars and civilian airplanes pulled down the orders total , an enormous jump in orders for heavy military equipment propped it up . 
Orders for capital defense goods skyrocketed 56 % , and a government analyst said nearly all areas saw increases , including airplanes , missiles , ships , tanks and communications equipment . 
Orders for military goods usually catapult in September , government officials say , as the Pentagon scrambles to spend its money before the new fiscal year begins Oct. 1 . 
While all the numbers in the durable goods report were adjusted for seasonal fluctuations , a Commerce Department analyst said that the adjustment probably did n't factor out all of the wide-ranging surge in defense orders . 
Without the increase in defense bookings , September orders would have plummeted 3.9 % . 
Analysts were most unsettled by evidence the backlog of orders at factories is slipping . 
Unfilled orders for durable goods rose 0.4 % in September , to $ 476.14 billion , after declining for the first time in 2 1\/2 years in August . 
In July unfilled orders grew 1 % . 
But analysts noted that excluding transportation - where what they believe was a temporary surge in auto demand pushed up the figures - order backlogs have declined for three months in a row . 
`` It means we 're eating into the bread that keeps us going . 
That is a little disturbing , '' Ms. Kleinman said . 
`` It also means if you have a real drop-off in orders , production will likely fall off very quickly because there is less to keep things going . '' 
Capital goods orders outside of the defense sector tumbled for the second month in a row , posting a 5.6 % drop after a 10.3 % decline . 
Such steep drops in a category seen as a barometer of business investment would customarily be grave news for the economy . 
But a Commerce Department analyst said that in both months orders would have risen had it not been for a drop in civilian aircraft bookings , a category that is showing declines only after a huge surge earlier this year . 
Still , Milton Hudson , senior economic adviser at Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. in New York , said : `` If you look back a half-year or so the evidence was pretty good of affirmative strength in the capital-goods sector . 
Now at least there are question marks about that , and without any question the pace of growth has slowed . 
Norfolk Southern Corp. directors authorized the railroad company to buy back as many as 45 million of its shares , which would have a current value of more than $ 1.7 billion . 
The buy-back , coupled with a nearly completed earlier purchase of 20 million shares , would reduce shares outstanding by more than 26 % . 
The Norfolk , Va. , company has 172.2 million shares outstanding . 
In a statement , Arnold B. McKinnon , chairman and chief executive officer , noted that the new repurchase program `` should serve to enhance shareholder value . '' 
A spokeswoman said the company will finance the buy-back with cash on hand , borrowing and `` cash Norfolk expects to generate . '' 
Analysts said they expected the action , and investors applauded the move . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Norfolk Southern shares closed at $ 37.875 , up $ 1.125 . 
Still , analysts do n't expect the buy-back to significantly affect per-share earnings in the short term . 
`` The impact wo n't be that great , '' said Graeme Lidgerwood of First Boston Corp . 
That is in part because of the effect of having to average the number of shares outstanding , she said . 
In addition , Mrs. Lidgerwood said , Norfolk is likely to draw down its cash initially to finance the purchases and thus forfeit some interest income . 
Longer term , however , the buy-back is expected to increase earnings , especially after 1990 , Mrs. Lidgerwood said . 
Moreover , the extensive program in effect establishes a floor for the stock price , said Joel Price , analyst for Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette . 
The buy-back `` is really a comfort to those who want to buy the stock that there is a { price } floor , '' he said . 
`` At a certain price , if the management thinks { the stock } is cheap , they can go in and buy it . '' 
Under the program , Norfolk plans to acquire shares in the open market . 
Under the earlier plan , Norfolk was authorized in 1987 to buy up to 20 million shares . 
It has purchased about 19 million of them . 
John B. Curcio , 55 years old , resigned as chairman of this diesel truck manufacturer , effective upon appointment of a successor . 
Last month , Mr. Curcio was succeeded by Ralph E. Reins as chief executive officer following several quarters of lackluster or declining performance . 
Falcon Holding Group Inc. said it agreed to acquire about 54,000 subscribers from First Carolina Cable TV Limited Partnership for about $ 100 million , or roughly $ 2,000 a subscriber . 
The subscribers are in 52 different communities in Georgia , Alabama and Mississippi . 
Completion of the sale is expected early next year , Falcon said . 
Currently , Falcon has about 750,000 cable-television subscribers around the nation ; the company 's cable-television unit reported 1988 revenue of about $ 100 million . 
In composite trading on the American Stock Exchange , Falcon closed at $ 20 , unchanged . 
Richard W. Lock , retired vice president and treasurer of Owens-Illinois Inc. , was named a director of this transportation industry supplier , increasing its board to six members . 
USX Corp. said it delayed the proposed initial public offering of common stock of RMI Titanium Co. because of market conditions . 
RMI Titanium is owned jointly by USX and Quantum Chemical Corp . 
USX , which had n't set a date for the offering , did n't disclose any timetable for the offering . 
Your Oct. 2 editorial `` Reding , Wrighting & Erithmatic '' on the recent `` education summit '' was like most pieces on the subject of education : It had little to say . 
Oddly , though , on the very same page you printed a comment that addresses one of the most serious shortcomings of the American education system . 
Unfortunately , the comment was buried in another article , so it could not stand out in an education context . 
In the Manager 's Journal , Atsushi Kageyama , in commenting on many differences between American and Japanese culture , said , `` Japanese children are raised in a way many Americans would find severe . 
After a wonderfully frivolous early childhood , they are exposed to rigid discipline as soon as they enter school . '' 
What far too many people concerned about education either fail to understand or choose to ignore is that American children , on the whole , are among the most undisciplined in the world , making any attempt at improvements in the mode of education potentially unsuccessful . 
Unless parents and educators alike start to develop more discipline in children , all the worthy concern , discussions and actions will not solve the problem . 
Allen B. Richards Peterborough , N.H . 
Retired Adm. William J. Crowe , former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , and Robert P. Luciano , chairman and chief executive officer of Schering-Plough Corp. , were elected directors of this securities firm . 
The board expanded to 17 seats . 
Tuesday , October 24 , 1989 
The key U.S. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but do n't always represent actual transactions . 
PRIME RATE : 10 1\/2 % . 
The base rate on corporate loans at large U.S. money center commercial banks . 
FEDERAL FUNDS : 8 3\/4 % high , 8 5\/8 % low , 8 11\/16 % near closing bid , 8 11\/16 % offered . 
Reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $ 1 million or more . 
Source : Fulton Prebon ( U.S.A . ) Inc . 
DISCOUNT RATE : 7 % . 
The charge on loans to depository institutions by the New York Federal Reserve Bank . 
CALL MONEY : 9 3\/4 % to 10 % . 
The charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER placed directly by General Motors Acceptance Corp. : 8.45 % 30 to 44 days ; 8.25 % 45 to 68 days ; 8.30 % 69 to 89 days ; 8.125 % 90 to 119 days ; 8 % 120 to 149 days ; 7.875 % 150 to 179 days ; 7.50 % 180 to 270 days . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER : High-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $ 1,000 : 8.55 % 30 days ; 8.475 % 60 days ; 8.45 % 90 days . 
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT : 8.09 % one month ; 8.09 % two months ; 8.06 % three months ; 8 % six months ; 7.94 % one year . 
Average of top rates paid by major New York banks on primary new issues of negotiable C.D.s , usually on amounts of $ 1 million and more . 
The minimum unit is $ 100,000 . 
Typical rates in the secondary market : 8.55 % one month ; 8.50 % three months ; 8.35 % six months . 
BANKERS ACCEPTANCES : 8.48 % 30 days ; 8.30 % 60 days ; 8.28 % 90 days ; 8.10 % 120 days ; 8 % 150 days ; 7.90 % 180 days . 
Negotiable , bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order . 
LONDON LATE EURODOLLARS : 8 11\/16 % to 8 9\/16 % one month ; 8 5\/8 % to 8 1\/2 % two months ; 8 5\/8 % to 8 1\/2 % three months ; 8 9\/16 % to 8 7\/16 % four months ; 8 1\/2 % to 8 3\/8 % five months ; 8 7\/16 % to 8 5\/16 % six months . 
LONDON INTERBANK OFFERED RATES ( LIBOR ) : 8 11\/16 % one month ; 8 11\/16 % three months ; 8 1\/2 % six months ; 8 1\/2 % one year . 
The average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the London market based on quotations at five major banks . 
FOREIGN PRIME RATES : Canada 13.50 % ; Germany 9 % ; Japan 4.875 % ; Switzerland 8.50 % ; Britain 15 % . 
These rate indications are n't directly comparable ; lending practices vary widely by location . 
TREASURY BILLS : Results of the Monday , October 23 , 1989 , auction of short-term U.S. government bills , sold at a discount from face value in units of $ 10,000 to $ 1 million : 7.52 % 13 weeks ; 7.50 % 26 weeks . 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP . ( Freddie Mac ) : Posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days . 
9.78 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 7.875 % , 2 % rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION ( Fannie Mae ) : Posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days ( priced at par ) 9.75 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 8.70 % , 6\/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
MERRILL LYNCH READY ASSETS TRUST : 8.59 % . 
Annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days ; not a forecast of future returns . 
Roy E. Parrott , the company 's president and chief operating officer since Sept. 1 , was named to its board . 
The appointment increased the number of directors to 10 , three of whom are company employees . 
Simpson is an auto parts maker . 
Japan has climbed up from the ashes of World War II and a gross national product of about $ 800 per capita to reach the heavyweight class among industrialized nations . 
Now this remarkable economic growth seems to be coming to an end because the government has not converted itself into a modern , democratic , `` developed nation '' mode of operation . 
Until 1980 , when Japan joined the $ 10,000 per capita GNP club of the advanced countries , it was a model developing nation . 
The government built ports , bridges , highways , schools , hospitals and railways . 
When industries were weak , it protected them . 
It gave the Japanese people a value system , based on the rationalization that given the country 's lack of natural resources , they must work hard to create value through exports and buy food with the surplus . 
Individual prosperity inevitably would result . 
That system has worked . 
The standard of living has increased steadily over the past 40 years ; more than 90 % of the people consider themselves middle class . 
The people have given their leading and only credible political party , the Liberal Democratic Party , clear and uninterrupted power for those 40 years . 
The LDP won by a landslide in the last election , in July 1986 . 
But less than two years later , the LDP started to crumble , and dissent rose to unprecedented heights . 
The symptoms all point to one thing : Japan does not have a modern government . 
Its government still wants to sit in the driver 's seat , set the speed , step on the gas , apply the brakes and steer , with 120 million people in the back seat . 
In a modern system , the government 's role is to give the people as much choice as possible and to keep them well informed so they are capable of making a choice . 
It also allows people to buy the best and the cheapest goods from anywhere in the world . 
The Japanese government does n't allow this . 
The Ministry of Agriculture and Fishery actually is a ministry for farmers and fishermen instead of a ministry of provisions . 
The Ministry of Health and Welfare is a ministry of doctors and pharmaceutical companies rather than an organization dedicated to protecting the health of the people . 
The Ministry of Education is nothing but a cartel for licensed teachers , and certainly does not act on behalf of students . 
The Ministry of Construction spreads concrete throughout the country and boasts in international conferences that Japan 's paved roadway per capita is the longest in the world , but they seldom think of the poor commuters who spend so much time sitting in traffic . 
The Ministry of Transportation serves the industry , certainly not the passengers who must pay extraordinarily high prices . 
And the Ministry of Foreign Affairs works for itself , supporting Japanese diplomats who sprinkle abundant aid money around the world to ensure that their seat at the dinner table is next to the host 's . 
This ministry has done nothing to correct the misunderstandings and misperceptions that are at the root of Japan 's deteriorating image . 
Instead , it seems to be using foreign pressure and even the trade conflict to expand its sphere of influence vis a vis other ministries . 
All this illustrates that Japanese ministries still have a `` provider '' mentality ; they do not serve the people , and particularly not consumers . 
They serve the industries and the special-interest groups . 
The rest of the world accepted such methods when Japan was developing . 
Japanese put up with it because the government provided job stability and growing paychecks . 
Japan is not a political country . 
It is a bureaucratic country . 
The Diet plays a minor role compared with the powerful bureaucratic system . 
Most bills are drafted by bureaucrats , not politicians . 
The Diet does n't normally even debate bills because the opposition parties are so often opposed to whatever LDP does that it would be a waste of time . 
So most bills are passed without full discussion ; particularly difficult bills are passed in the absence of the opposition parties . 
A recent example is the 3 % consumption tax on all commercial activities . 
This makes enormous sense in Japan , where direct tax accounts for more than 70 % of revenues and the capture rate of direct tax is so unfair . 
If you are a salaried man , Amen ! 100 % captured . 
If you are a retailer , 50 % , and a farmer , 30 % . 
To correct this inequality , most people would have favored an indirect tax , like the consumption tax . 
But the bill was passed without debate in the Diet , in the absence of the opposition . 
As a result , the Japanese people did n't know what to expect when the new law was introduced on April 1 . 
They were frustrated by the longer queues at the cashier and the small coins given as change . 
All of a sudden , prices were no longer in denominations of 100 or 200 . 
They were 103 or 206 . 
Pockets exploded with one-yen coins . 
While people were jingling their change , the LDP politicians were caught in scandals . 
Money , such as in Recruit 's political donations , and women , as in the cases of Prime Minister Sosuke Uno and Secretary General Tokuo Yamashita , seldom have caused political scandals in Japan . 
Whereas most men were a bit ambivalent about the sex scandals ( though they were furious about Recruit ) , women were upset about both and surged to the polls . 
In the recent Upper House and Tokyo metropolitan congressional elections , in which the Socialist Party won a runaway victory , 60 % of all women voted , as opposed to the usual 40 % . 
It is difficult to analyze how much of their anger was due to Recruit , the sex scandals , or the one-yen coins in their purses , but they obviously were voting to punish the LDP . 
Taken by surprise , the Socialist Party is busy changing its doctrines . 
It 's now OK to deal with the U.S. , but not the Soviet Union . 
Nuclear power plants are acceptable . 
The U.S.-Japan Security Treaty can continue , sort of . 
And so on . 
Against the rapid cosmetic overhaul of the Socialist Party the LDP has been paralyzed . 
Now is the time to reform the government from a provider , developing-country vanguard role to that of a modern , industrialized nation in which consumers have the ultimate choice . 
If the LDP , as currently composed , ca n't make the transformation , then it should split into two parties . 
One party could stand for consumer interests , small government , free trade and globalism to put Japan clearly among the most developed and open countries . 
The other party could continue on the traditional track of the LDP , representing the manufacturers ' preference for larger government , control , regulation and protectionism . 
The LDP must make a decision immediately ; Lower House elections must take place before June . 
In the current mood of the Japanese people , journalists and even some industrialists , giving power to the Socialists might be good for the LDP , cleansing it of past sins . 
We must not forget , however , that such a humble political experiment could cause a global tidal wave of shocks in real-estate and financial markets . 
At the most there is only nine months before the LDP fuse burns out . 
Mr. Ohmae is managing director of McKinsey & Co. in Japan . 
Early this century , diamond mining in the magnificent dunes where the Namib Desert meets the Atlantic Ocean was a day at the beach . 
Men would crawl in the sand looking for shiny stones . 
It was as easy as collecting sea shells at Malibu . 
Men are still combing the beach with shovels and hand brushes , searching for that unusual glint . 
But only after a fleet of 336 gargantuan earthmoving vehicles belonging to De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. , the world 's diamond kingpins , do their work . 
Last year , 43 million tons of desert were moved from one dune to another to recover 934,242 carats , which comes to 46 tons of sand per carat , or one-fifth gram . 
Oh yes , the Atlantic was also pushed back 300 yards . 
`` If there 's diamonds out there , we 'll get to them , '' says Les Johns , De Beers 's engineering manager . 
Here , wedged between shifting dunes and pounding waves at the world 's most inhospitable diamond dig , lies the earth 's most precious jewel box . 
Thanks to centuries of polishing by Mother Nature -- first in the gentle current of the Orange River that carried the stones from South Africa 's interior , then in the cold surf of the ocean , and finally in the coarse sands of the desert -- 98 % of the diamonds uncovered are of gem quality . 
While other mines might yield more carats , a higher percentage of them go to industrial use . 
Since this treasure chest is too big to fit in a bank vault , it has been turned into one . 
Months after railway worker Zacharias Lewala first picked up a diamond from the sand in 1908 , the German colonialists who controlled Namibia proclaimed a wide swath of the desert -- about 200 miles north from the Orange River and 60 miles inland from the Atlantic -- a restricted area , a designation normally reserved for military operations . 
When the Germans lost World War I , they lost Namibia to South Africa and the diamonds to Ernest Oppenheimer , patriarch of Anglo American Corp. and De Beers . 
Today , no one gets in or out of the restricted area without De Beers 's stingy approval . 
The mining zone has thus remained one of the most desolate places in Africa . 
Ghost towns dot the Namib dunes , proving diamonds are n't forever . 
Oranjemund , the mine headquarters , is a lonely corporate oasis of 9,000 residents . 
Jackals roam the streets at night , and gemsbok , hardy antelope with long straight horns , wander in from the desert to drink from water sprinklers . 
On most days , the desert 's heat and the cool of the ocean combine to create a mist like a damp rag . 
The wind , stinging with sand , never seems to stop . 
Still , miners from all parts of Namibia as well as professional staff from De Beers 's head offices in South Africa and London keep coming . 
And Oranjemund boasts attractions besides diamonds . 
There are six video rental shops , three restaurants , one cinema and 34 sports and recreation clubs for everything from cricket to lawn bowling . 
The pride of Oranjemund is the 18-hole golf course -- with the largest sand trap in the world . 
Last year , when the rising Orange River threatened to swamp the course , the same engineers who are pushing back the Atlantic rushed to build a wall to hold back the flood . 
`` Nothing is too good for our golf course , '' says Tony George , a mining engineer . 
Despite fears the mine may be partially nationalized by the new Namibian government following next month 's elections freeing the country from South African control , De Beers engineers are working to extend the mine 's productive life for another 25 years , from the current estimate of 10 . 
Huge machines that look as though they came from the Star Wars desert-battle scene lumber among the dunes . 
Mechanized vacuum cleaners probe the sand like giant anteaters ; a whirring ferris wheellike excavator , with buckets instead of seats , chews through layers of compacted sand ; tracks and conveyor belts , shuttling sand to the screening plants , criss-cross the beach . 
Then there is the artifical sea wall , 600 yards long and 60 yards thick , jutting into the ocean . 
Made of sand , it receives around-the-clock maintainence against the battering waves . 
When the mining in front of the wall is complete , it is moved northward . 
A companion jetty that helps hold back the sea looks like a rusting junkyard . 
Engineers first used concrete blocks to bolster the barrier , but the ocean tossed them aside like driftwood . 
Then someone decided to try broken-down earthmoving equipment that , inexplicably , held against the waves . 
`` The Caterpillar people are n't too happy when they see their equipment used like that , '' shrugs Mr. George . 
`` They figure it 's not a very good advert . '' 
Despite all these innovations , most of the diamonds are still found in the sand swept away by the men wielding shovels and brushes -- the ignominiously named `` bedrock sweepers '' who toil in the wake of the excavators . 
Laboring in blue and gray overalls , they are supposed to concentrate on cleaning out crevices , and not strain their eyes looking for diamonds . 
But should they spy one , the company will pay a bonus equal to one-third its value . 
For these workers at the bottom of the mine 's pay scale , this is usually enough to overcome the temptation to steal -- a crime that could earn them up to 15 years in jail . 
Still , employees do occasionally try to smuggle out a gem or two . 
One man wrapped several diamonds in the knot of his tie . 
Another poked a hole in the heel of his shoe . 
A food caterer stashed stones in the false bottom of a milk pail . 
None made it past the body searches and X-rays of mine security . 
DISASTER STATES are n't jumping to raise taxes for relief and recovery . 
Not yet , anyway . 
Just after Hurricane Hugo battered South Carolina , some officials talked of perhaps adding a penny to the state gasoline tax or raising property taxes . 
Gov. Campbell responded , `` They 're mentioning rope when there 's been a hanging in the family . '' 
A spokesman says the governor believes he can avoid increases by relying on federal aid and shifting funds in state programs . 
Still , Hugo 's impact may revive unsuccessful proposals to give local governments authority to levy sales taxes . 
A spokesman for North Carolina Gov. Martin says Hugo has n't prompted proposals for state or local increases . 
California , where earthquake damage may top $ 5 billion , plans a special legislative session . 
Property-tax relief is likely . 
Legislators are talking about temporary rises in sales or gasoline taxes , although Gov. Deukmejian says they should be a last resort . 
Needs are n't clear , and the state constitution makes increasing taxes and spending very difficult . 
But some legislators think the time may be ripe to revise the constitution . 
THE IRS WILL PAY if its error burdens you with bank charges . 
Policy statement P-5-39 sets out terms . 
As a result of an erroneous IRS levy on a bank account , a taxpayer may incur administrative and overdraft charges . 
If the IRS admits its error and the charges have been paid , it will reimburse a taxpayer who has n't refused to give timely answers to IRS inquiries or has n't contributed to continuing or compounding the error . 
The IRS recently amended the policy to cover stop-payment charges for checks lost by the IRS . 
If the IRS asks for and gets a replacement for a check that it concedes it lost in processing , it will reimburse the taxpayer for the stop-payment charge on the original . 
Reimbursement claims must be filed with the IRS district or service-center director within a year after the expense accrues . 
If the IRS seeks late-payment interest because of the lost check , you should request interest abatement , publisher Prentice Hall notes . 
JUST FIVE ACRES MORE are all we need to feel really at home , they say . 
A couple we 'll call the Blandings spent nearly $ 800,000 on a 15-acre plot and main home and have an old $ 175,000 mortgage exempt from the new limit on mortgage-interest deductions . 
They plan to expand the home site by buying five adjoining acres for $ 200,000 , borrowed against a first mortgage on the five acres and also collateralized by the 15 acres . 
Their debt will be well under the $ 1 million limit -- on borrowing to acquire , build , or improve a home -- that qualifies for mortgage-interest deductions . 
As you can guess , the Blandings want to deduct home-mortgage interest on the $ 200,000 loan . 
But , IRS private ruling 8940061 notes , no rule or court case bears directly on the issue of adding land to a principal residence . 
So the IRS has drawn a rationale from the sale of a home site split in two and sold in different years to the same buyer ; a court let the seller in that old case treat this as the sale of one residence . 
Thus , the IRS says , the Blandings ' $ 200,000 loan is home-acquisition debt , and interest on it is fully deductible . 
EARTHQUAKE VICTIMS facing imminent filing and payment deadlines will get extensions and penalty waivers like those provided for Hugo 's victims ; IRS Notice 89108 has details . 
Notice 89-107 offers added relief for hurricane-hit concerns that must file pension and benefit-plan returns . 
REPORTS OF PAYMENTS to independent contractors for services must be filed by businesses , but do n't bet that contractors ' unreported income will be detected that way . 
The General Accounting Office estimates that 50 % of IRS audits do n't spot companies that fail to file the reports . 
UH HUH : 
A claim by Peter Testa of New York that a stranger paid him $ 500 to go into a bank and change $ 44,400 in small bills into large bills `` is unconvincing , '' the Tax Court found . 
It held that Testa is taxable on $ 44,400 of unreported income . 
WHY BE A MIDDLEMAN for charitable gifts ? a retiree asks . 
A retired electrical engineer we 'll call Ben works part-time as a consultant , but he does n't want to earn so much that Social Security reduces his benefits . 
So he has arranged for a university foundation to set up a scholarship fund for undergraduate engineering students . 
He plans to tell clients to pay certain fees directly to the foundation instead of to him ; he would omit those fees from income reported on his return . 
So he asked the IRS if the plan would work . 
Well , notes IRS private ruling 8934014 , `` a fundamental principle '' is that income must be taxed to whoever earns it . 
The rule goes back at least as far as a 1930 Supreme Court decision , Robert Willens of Shearson Lehman Hutton says . 
If you assign your income to another , you still have controlled its disposition and enjoyed the fruits of your labor , even if indirectly . 
Ben earns any fees sent directly to charity and is taxable on them , the IRS says ; of course , he also may take a charitable deduction for them . 
BRIEFS : 
Ways and Means veteran Gephardt ( D. , Mo . ) moves to the House Budget Committee ; Rep. Cardin ( D. , Md . ) replaces him ... . 
Seattle 's license fees for adult peep shows vary from those for other coin-operated amusements without serving a substantial government interest and are unconstitutional , the ninth-circuit appeals court holds for Acorn Investments Inc . 
Blue-chip advertisers have plenty of complaints about the magazines they advertise in , ranging from inadequate consumer research to ad `` clutter '' and a seemingly unchecked proliferation of special interest magazines . 
Criticism from such big advertisers as Estee Lauder Inc. , Colgate-Palmolive Co. and Seagram Co. put a damper on the euphoria at the American Magazine Conference here . 
The conference opened Monday with glowing reports about consumer magazines ' growth in circulation and advertising revenue in the past year . 
`` Magazines are not providing us in-depth information on circulation , '' said Edgar Bronfman Jr. , president and chief operating officer of Seagram , in a panel discussion . 
`` How do readers feel about the magazine ? 
How deeply do they read it ? 
Research does n't tell us whether people actually do read the magazines they subscribe to . '' 
Reuben Mark , chief executive of Colgate-Palmolive , said advertisers lack detailed demographic and geographic breakdowns of magazines ' audiences . 
`` We need research that convinces us that magazines are a real value in reader 's lives , that readers are really involved . '' 
The critics also lambasted the magazine industry for something executives often are very proud of : the growth in magazine titles during the 1980s . 
Leonard Lauder , president and chief executive officer of Estee Lauder , said consumer magazines are suffering from what he called `` niche-itis , '' the increasing number of magazines that target the idosyncratic interests of readers . 
`` Niche-itis fragments our advertising dollars , '' said Mr. Lauder . 
`` We are being over-magazined . 
We are constantly faced with deciding which partnerships { with magazines } we can keep . '' 
He added : `` There 's probably even a magazine for left-handed golfers ... but the general interest magazine is something we all miss , and it should come back . '' 
Mr. Lauder also attacked what he sees as the wide imitation of Elle , a fashion magazine published by Diamandis Communications Inc. , and criticized the practice of stacking ads at the front of magazines . 
`` Readers do n't want to face all those ad pages at the front of a magazine , '' he said . 
Magazine editors did not take the criticisms lying down . 
`` We spend a fortune on research information , '' said Steve Burzon , publisher of Meredith Corp. 's Metropolitan Home . 
And Tina Brown , editor of Conde Nast Publications Inc. 's Vanity Fair , said advertisers are frequently asked to take advertising positions in the back of her magazine to relieve ad clutter . 
`` But advertisers would n't think of it , '' she said . 
Bernard Leser , president of Conde Nast , added : `` Our research shows we sell more of our heavier issues ... because readers believe they are getting more for what they pay for . 
Wall Street securities giant Salomon Inc. posted a big , unexpected earnings gain in the third quarter , buoyed by its securities trading and investment banking activities . 
Salomon said net income soared to $ 177 million , or $ 1.28 a share , from $ 65 million , or 38 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue more than doubled to $ 2.62 billion from $ 1.29 billion . 
A Salomon spokesman said its stock , bond and foreign exchange trading , as well as its investment banking operations , were mostly responsible for the earnings jump . 
`` The earnings were fine and above expectations , '' said Michael W. Blumstein , an analyst at First Boston Corp . 
Nevertheless , Salomon 's stock fell $ 1.125 yesterday to close at $ 23.25 a share in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
`` I suspect October was n't as good as the third quarter , and they 'll have difficulty matching the third quarter in the fourth quarter , '' Mr. Blumstein said . 
But some analysts say Salomon has turned the corner . 
`` I upgraded the firm to my buy list because I certainly see signs of improvement , '' says Lawrence Eckenfelder , an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities . 
`` The market has been overly harsh to them . '' 
Analysts say investors remain skittish toward Salomon because of its volatile earnings . 
In the first quarter , Salomon had a record loss of $ 28 million on revenue of $ 1.54 billion . 
But in the second quarter , Salomon posted a record $ 253 million net on revenue of $ 2.33 billion . 
For the real estate industry , a watchword for the 1990s will be buy , more than build . 
That 's the word expected to be on the lips of the more than 3,000 developers , pension-fund advisers and real estate financiers slated to attend a four-day conference , beginning here today , sponsored by the Urban Land Institute . 
The ULI is a non-profit research and education group based in Washington , D.C. , with 14,000 members nationwide . 
With the market overbuilt , builders are finding limited opportunities and increased risks . 
Developers and money managers are looking for bargains among the thousands of financially troubled properties around the country . 
Real estate professionals now often bill themselves as `` turnaround experts '' and `` workout specialists . '' 
Conference attendees are expected to be buzzing about the workings of the recently formed Resolution Trust Corp. , a federal agency charged with disposing of an estimated $ 200 billion of real estate dumped in government hands by insolvent savings and loans . 
Developers are also eyeing the real estate portfolios of major corporations . 
Some plan to pursue foreign development ventures , mostly in Europe . 
And other developers may shift from commercial to residential development in the U.S. . 
`` There are n't as many economically viable alternatives for real estate developers in this country as 10 years ago , '' says Charles Shaw , a Chicago-based real estate developer . `` 
So developers are saying they will look into distressed properties . 
They 'll go into someone else 's pasture as long as it 's greener than the one they 're in now . '' 
Developers are also forming more joint ventures with pension funds and insurance companies that can finance big projects . 
The builders are more willing to give up some equity and rely on management and consulting fees to stay afloat in the soft market . 
`` Developers are teaming up with institutions often acting as project managers , '' says Smedes York , ULI president and president of York Properties Inc. , of Raleigh , N.C . 
`` They are growing more pragmatic about their role . '' 
Real estate firms are also using their alliances with financial institutions to amass acquisition funds . 
`` Why should you beat your brains out fighting the environmentalists , the neighborhood groups , dealing with traffic mitigation , sewers and fighting city hall , then try to convince a lender to lend you money in an overbuilt market when you can get pension fund money , buy a portfolio , sell off pieces off it and play your own game ? '' says Jack Rodman , managing partner of the Los Angeles office of Kenneth Leventhal Inc. a national accounting firm . 
But experts say that when it comes to distressed properties , finding diamonds in the rough is n't easy . 
The level of interest in the RTC 's properties has been greater than expected , and has come from larger companies than initially anticipated , says Stan Ross , Leventhal 's co-managing partner . 
And to succeed in the turnaround business , he says , developers may have to put in a lot of money and time . 
Finding pension funds and other sources willing to invest is a high priority . 
Quips David Shulman , director of real estate research for Salomon Brothers Inc. : `` A theme of the Urban Land conference will be ` take a pension fund manager to lunch . 
Sheraton Corp. and Pan American World Airways announced that they and two Soviet partners will construct two `` world-class '' hotels within a mile of Red Square in Moscow . 
U.S. and Soviet officials hailed the joint project as a new indication of the further thaw in U.S.-Soviet relations . 
`` This is an outstanding example of how the East and the West can work together for their mutual benefit and progress , '' said Soviet Ambassador Yuri Dubinin , who hosted a signing ceremony for the venture 's partners at the Soviet embassy here . 
Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher , who attended the ceremony , called the undertaking a `` historic step '' in the evolution of U.S.-Soviet ties . 
He added that it likely will have a `` mulitiplier effect '' in stimulating further trade between the two countries . 
The project will be the largest U.S.-backed joint venture to be undertaken in the Soviet Union in recent years . 
One of the hotels , to be called the Sheraton Moscow , will have 450 rooms and will cost an estimated $ 75 million to build . 
The six-story hotel will be on Gorky Street and initially will cater mostly to business travelers . 
It will have a Russian tavern , an English pub , a discotheque and Japanese and Italian restaurants , according to a Sheraton announcement . 
The hotel is scheduled to open in 1992 . 
The second hotel , to be called the Budapest Hotel , is to be constructed at a site even closer to Red Square . 
Details about its size and cost have n't yet been determined . 
Sheraton , a subsidiary of ITT Corp. , will have a 40 % share in the two hotels ; Pan American , a subsidiary of Pan Am Corp. , will have a 10 % share . 
The Soviet owners will be Mossoviet , Moscow 's city governing body , and Aeroflot , the Soviet national airline . 
Although a Finnish group has a minority interest in an already operating Moscow hotel , the Sheraton-Pan Am venture will be the first joint-venture hotels in the Soviet Union to have as much as 50 % foreign ownership . 
U.S. companies account for less than 8 % of the 1,000 or more Soviet joint ventures that have been announced since the Soviets began encouraging such undertakings in 1987 . 
But some U.S. companies are negotiating projects that could be among the biggest ones to be launched . 
Chevron Corp. , Amoco Corp. , Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. , and Eastman Kodak Co. are among the U.S. companies known to be considering such ventures . 
Sheraton and Pan Am said they are assured under the Soviet joint-venture law that they can repatriate profits from their hotel venture . 
The Sheraton Moscow will charge about $ 140 to $ 150 a day for each of its rooms , and it will accept payment only in currencies that can be traded in foreign exchange markets , according to a Sheraton executive . 
Thomas Plaskett , Pan Am 's chairman , said the U.S. airline 's participation is a natural outgrowth of its current arrangements with Aeroflot to jointly operate nonstop New York-Moscow flights . 
He said the rising volume of passenger traffic on this route justifies a major investment in new high-standard Moscow hotels . 
David Shaffer was named to the new post of executive vice president of the Maxwell Macmillan group of this communications giant . 
Mr. Shaffer takes primary responsibility for the electronic and technical-services group . 
He had been group vice president of the electronic-publishing group . 
Also , Sheldon Aboff , formerly a vice president at Maxwell , was named group vice president with responsibility for various electronic and publishing-group companies . 
Soichiro Honda 's picture now hangs with Henry Ford 's in the U.S. Automotive Hall of Fame , and the game-show `` Jeopardy '' is soon to be Sony-owned . 
But no matter how much Japan gets under our skin , we 'll still have mom and apple pie . 
On second thought , make that just mom . 
A Japanese apple called the Fuji is cropping up in orchards the way Hondas did on U.S. roads . 
By 1995 it will be planted more often than any other apple tree , according to a recent survey of six apple-industry sages by Washington State University horticulturist Robert Norton . 
Some fruit visionaries say the Fuji could someday tumble the Red Delicious from the top of America 's apple heap . 
It certainly wo n't get there on looks . 
Compared to the Red Delicious , the exemplar of apple pulchritude , the Fuji is decidedly more dowdy -- generally smaller , less-perfectly shaped , greenish , with tinges of red . 
To hear most U.S. growers tell it , we 'd still be in Paradise if the serpent had proffered one to Eve . 
But how sweet it is . 
It has more sugar `` than any apple we 've ever tested , '' says Duane Greene , a University of Massachusetts pomologist , or apple scholar . 
It has a long shelf life and `` does n't fool the public , '' says Grady Auvil , an Orondo , Wash. , grower who is planting Fujis and spreading the good word about them . 
`` It does n't look nice on the outside while getting mealy inside . '' 
Mr. Auvil , razor sharp at 83 , has picked and packed a zillion pecks of apples over the past 65 years . 
He is known as the father of the U.S.-grown Granny Smith , a radically different apple that the conventional wisdom once said would never catch on . 
It did , shaking the apple establishment to its roots . 
Now , even more radical changes seem afoot as the grand old maverick of American apples plays the role of Hiroshi Appleseed . 
`` The Fuji is going to be No. 1 to replace the Red Delicious , '' he says . 
The Delicious hegemony wo n't end anytime soon . 
New apple trees grow slowly , and the Red Delicious is almost as entrenched as mom . 
Its roots are patriotic -- with the first trees appearing in 1872 in an orchard near Peru , Iowa , to be exact . 
For more than 50 years , it has been the apple of our eye . 
A good Delicious can indeed be delicious . 
More than twice as many Red Delicious apples are grown as the Golden variety , America 's No. 2 apple . 
But the apple industry is ripe for change . 
`` Red Delicious has been overplanted , and its prices have dropped below the cost of production , '' says Washington State 's Mr. Norton . 
The scare over Alar , a growth regulator that makes apples redder and crunchier but may be carcinogenic , made consumers shy away from the Delicious , though they were less affected than the McIntosh . 
The glut and consequent lower prices , combined with cancer fears , was a very serious blow to growers . 
`` A lot of growers wo n't be around in a few years , '' says Mr. Norton , although they have stopped using Alar . 
One may be William Broderick , a Sterling , Mass. , grower . 
`` This is beautiful stuff , '' he says , looking ruefully at big boxes of just-picked Red Delicious next to his barn . 
`` But I 'm going to lose $ 50,000 to $ 60,000 on it . 
I 'm going to have to get another job this year just to eat . '' 
Besides rotten prices , he has been hit recently by hail , a bark-nibbling horde of mice , fungi and bugs . 
Some 500 insects and 150 diseases wiggle , chew and romp through growers ' nightmares , including maggots , mites , mildew , thrips , black rot and the flat-headed borer . 
Even if a grower beats them back , his $ 2,000 rented bees might buzz off to the neighbors ' orchards instead of pollinating his , Mr. Broderick says . 
Though growers ca n't always keep the worm from the apple , they can protect themselves against the price vagaries of any one variety by diversifying -- into the recently imported Gala , a sweet New Zealand native ; the Esopus Spitzenburg , reportedly Thomas Jefferson 's favorite apple ; disease-resistant kinds like the Liberty . 
`` I 've ripped out a lot of Delicious '' and grafted the trees with many different shoots , says Steve Wood , a West Lebanon , N.H. , grower , tramping through his 100-acre Poverty Lane Orchard on a crisp autumn day recently . 
`` I 've got 70 kinds of apples . 
Here 's a Waltana , '' he exclaims , picking one off a tree . 
He bites it , scowls and throws it down . `` 
It 's a real dog . '' 
Supermarkets are getting into the variety act , too . 
They still buy apples mainly for big , red good looks -- that 's why so many taste like woodchucks ' punching bags . 
But freshness counts more than it once did , and stores are expanding shelf space for unconventional , but tastier , and often pricier , apples . 
`` Rather than sell 39-cents-a-pound Delicious , maybe we can sell 79-cents-a-pound Fujis , '' says Chuck Tryon , perishables director for Super Valu Inc. , a Minneapolis supermarket chain and food distributor . 
The Fuji is a product of meticulous Japanese pomological engineering , which fostered it 50 years ago at a government research orchard . 
Japanese researchers have bred dozens of strains of Fujis to hone its color , taste and shelf life . 
Now the best of them age as gracefully as Grannies , the industry 's gold standard for storability . 
In the cornucopia of go-go apples , the Fuji 's track record stands out : During the past 15 years , it has gone from almost zilch to some 50 % of Japan 's market . 
`` The Japanese apple market is very keyed to high quality , '' says David Lane , a scientist at a Canadian horticulture research center in Summerland , British Columbia , and so apples are more of a delicacy there than a big food commodity . 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture estimates that this year Americans will eat about 40 % more fresh apples per capita than the Japanese . 
The Fuji is still small potatoes in the U.S. , sold mainly in fruit boutiques . 
But in California , says Craig Ito , a Fuji-apple grower , `` There 's a Fuji apple cult . 
Once somebody eats one , they get hooked . '' 
Mr. Auvil , the Washington grower , says that he could sell Fujis to Taiwan buyers at $ 40 a box if he had them . 
( Taiwan already is a big importer of Fujis from other places , he adds . ) 
But his first crop wo n't be picked till next year . 
`` I expect to see the demand exceed supply for Fujis for the next 10 to 15 years , '' he adds . 
Washington Red Delicious , by the way , are wholesaling for less than $ 10 a box these days . 
Mr. Auvil sees Fujis , in part , as striking a blow against the perversion of U.S. apples by supermarkets . 
`` When the chain stores took over , there was no longer a connection between grower and consumer . 
A guy is sitting up in an office deciding what you 're going to eat . '' 
After all , until the 1950s even the Red Delicious was a firm , delectable morsel . 
Then , as growers bred them more for looks , and to satisfy supermarket chains ' demands of long-term storage , the Red went into decline . 
Now , those red applelike things stores sell in summer are fruitbowl lovely , but usually not good eating . 
They do deserve respect , however -- they are almost a year old , probably equal to about 106 in human years . 
The Fuji , to be sure , has blemishes too . 
It ripens later than most apples , and growing it in U.S. areas with chilly autumns may be tricky . 
Moreover , the frumpy Fuji must compete with an increasingly dolledup Delicious . 
Mr. Broderick , the Massachusetts grower , says the `` big boss '' at a supermarket chain even rejected his Red Delicious recently because they were n't waxed and brushed for extra shine . 
And he had n't used hormones , which many growers employ to elongate their Delicious apples for greater eye appeal . 
Still , Mr. Auvil points out , Grannies became popular without big , red looks , so why not Fujis ? 
He sees a shift in American values -- at least regarding apples -- toward more emphasis on substance and less on glitz . 
`` Taste has finally come to the fore , '' he says . 
Or , for that matter , the core . 
Brush Wellman Inc. said its board increased the number of shares of common stock to be purchased under a previously authorized program to 3.9 million from 2.9 million . 
The maker of engineered materials has acquired more than 2.7 million shares under the program . 
The state attorney general 's office filed suit against five New York brokerage firms , charging them with responsibility for much of a $ 200 million loss incurred by the state treasurer 's office in 1987 . 
The suit sets the firms ' liability at more than $ 185 million . 
The firms are Morgan Stanley & Co. , Salomon Brothers Inc. , County Natwest Government Securities Inc. , Greenwich Capital Markets Inc. and Goldman , Sachs & Co . 
The firms have all said that West Virginia 's suit is without merit . 
On Friday , the firms filed a suit against West Virginia in New York state court asking for a declaratory judgment absolving them of liability . 
That suit is pending . 
The suits relate to a $ 200 million loss , disclosed in December , that was suffered by West Virginia 's consolidated investment pool . 
The pool invested idle cash for many state agencies and local governments . 
In its suit , the attorney general 's office alleges that brokers encouraged members of the treasurer 's office to engage in high-volume , high-risk transactions that benefited the brokers . 
Few people are aware that the federal government lends almost as much money as it borrows . 
From 1980 to 1988 , while federal budget deficits totaled $ 1.41 trillion , the government issued $ 394 billion of new direct loans and an additional $ 756 billion of new primary loan guarantees . 
These figures omit secondary guarantees , deposit insurance , and the activities of Government-Sponsored Enterprises ( a huge concern in its own right , as detailed on this page May 3 ) . 
Federal credit programs date back to the New Deal , and were meant to break even financially . 
Since the 1950s , federal lending has experienced extraordinary growth in credit volume , subsidy rates , and policy applications , spurred on by the growth of government in general and budget gimmicks and deceptive management in particular . 
As we will see , many of these obligations do n't show up as part of the federal deficit . 
But recent events indicate that federal credit is out of control . 
Student loan defaults remain high at about 12 % , and the program has been rocked by allegations of fraud and mismanagement . 
Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) loans have turned into de facto giveaway programs ; losses over the next three years are expected to exceed $ 20 billion . 
Defaults on Veterans Affairs loan guarantees have quadrupled in the past eight years . 
Last month , the General Accounting Office reported that defaults in Federal Housing Administration guarantees were five times as high as previously estimated , and that FHA 's equity fell to minus $ 2.9 billion . 
GAO 's findings are particularly troubling because the FHA has about $ 300 billion in obligations outstanding and had previously been considered one of the most financially secure credit programs . 
Scores of other credit programs , subsidizing agriculture , small business , exporters , defense , energy , transportation and others , are less visible but in no better shape . 
If the programs continue their present path , the potential government losses are staggering : The federal government holds $ 222 billion in direct loans outstanding and backs an additional $ 550 billion in primary guarantees . 
( Secondary guarantees of pools of FHA - and VA-backed loans by the agency known as Ginnie Mae currently exceed $ 330 billion . ) 
Although external events have contributed to the morass , the principal causes of the current crisis are internal and generic to all programs . 
To reduce the risks while still retaining the legitimate benefits these programs can provide , credit policy must : 1 . Use credit to improve the operation of capital markets , not to provide subsidies . 
There is a fundamental conflict between providing a subsidy and maintaining the integrity of a credit program . 
If the program is meant to provide a subsidy , collecting the debt defeats the original goal . 
Thus , subsidized loans tend to turn into giveaway programs , with increasing subsidy and default rates over time . 
To avoid this problem , government should issue credit only if it intends to use every legal method to collect . 
In contrast , credit programs can be appropriate tools to improve the operation of capital markets . 
For example , legal restrictions on interstate banking once inhibited the supply of credit to the agricultural sector . 
Farm lending was enacted to correct this problem by providing a reliable flow of lendable funds . 
However , this in no way justifies the huge government subsidies and losses on such loans . 
Credit policy should separate these two competing objectives and eliminate aspects that provide the subsidy . 
For example , student loans currently attempt to subsidize college attendance and mitigate problems created by the fact that students ' future earnings are not accepted as collateral . 
The program provides highly subsidized loans to any student whose family earns less than a particular amount . 
High default rates , a low interest rate , and government coverage of all interest costs while the student is in school make program costs extremely high . 
Families that do not need the loan can make money simply by putting the loan in the bank and paying it back when the student graduates . 
In contrast , a student loan program that was meant solely to correct capital-market imperfections would allow loans for any student , regardless of family income , at market or near-market rates . 
While the student was in school , interest costs would either be paid by the student or added to the loan balance . 
This program , combined with cash grants to needy students , would reduce program costs and much more effectively target the intended beneficiaries . 
2 . Provide better incentives . 
Given the structure of most credit programs , it is surprising that default rates are not even higher . 
Guarantee rates are typically 100 % , giving lenders little reason to screen customers carefully . 
Reducing those rates moderately ( say , to 75 % ) would still provide substantial assistance to borrowers . 
But it would also encourage lenders to choose more creditworthy customers , and go a long way toward reducing defaults . 
For example , the Small Business Administration has had reasonable success in reducing both guarantee rates and default rates in its Preferred Lenders ' Program . 
Borrowers ' incentives are equally skewed . 
Since the government has a dismal record of collecting bad debts , the costs to the borrower of defaulting are usually low . 
In addition , it is often possible to obtain a new government loan even if existing debts are not paid off . 
Simple policy prescriptions in this case would be to improve debt collection ( taking the gloves off contracted collection agencies ) and to deny new credit to defaulters . 
These provisions would be difficult to enforce for a program intended to provide a subsidy , but would be reasonable and effective devices for programs that attempt to offset market imperfections . 
3 . Record the true costs of credit programs in the federal budget . 
Since the budget measures cash flow , a new $ 1 direct loan is treated as a $ 1 expenditure , even though at least part of the loan will be paid back . 
Loan guarantees do n't appear at all until the borrower defaults , so new guarantees do not raise the deficit , even though they create future liabilities for the government . 
By converting an expenditure or loan to a guarantee , the government can ensure the same flow of resources and reduce the current deficit . 
Predictably , guarantees outstanding have risen by $ 130 billion since 1985 , while direct loans outstanding have fallen by $ 30 billion . 
The true budgetary cost of a credit subsidy is the discounted value of the net costs to government . 
This figure could be estimated using techniques employed by private lenders to forecast losses , or determined by selling loans to private owners ( without federal guarantees ) . 
Neither technique is perfect , but both are better than the current system , which misstates the costs of new credit programs by amounts that vary substantially and average about $ 20 billion annually , according to the Congressional Budget Office . 
A budget that reflected the real costs of lending would eliminate incentives to convert spending or lending programs to guarantees and would let taxpayers know what Congress is committing them to . 
4 . Impose standard accounting and administrative practices . 
Creative accounting is a hallmark of federal credit . 
Many agencies roll over their debt , paying off delinquent loans by issuing new loans , or converting defaulted loan guarantees into direct loans . 
In any case , they avoid having to write off the loans . 
Some agencies simply keep bad loans on the books ; as late as 1987 , the Export-Import Bank held in its portfolio at face value loans made to Cuba in the 1950s . 
More seriously , FmHA has carried several billion dollars of defaulted loans at face value . 
Until GAO 's recent audit , FHA books had not been subject to a complete external audit in 15 years . 
The administration of federal credit should closely parallel private lending practices , including the development of a loan loss reserve and regular outside audits . 
Establishing these practices would permit earlier identification of emerging financial crises , provide better information for loan sales and budgeting decisions , and reduce fraud . 
Government lending was not intended to be a way to obfuscate spending figures , hide fraudulent activity , or provide large subsidies . 
The reforms described above would provide a more limited , but clearer , safer and ultimately more useful role for government as a lender . 
Without such reforms , credit programs will continue to be a large-scale , high-risk proposition for taxpayers . 
Mr. Gale is an assistant professor of economics at UCLA . 
Malcolm S. Todt was named vice president and senior officer in charge of equipment leasing to municipalities , a new effort of this bond insurer . 
Mr. Todt had been vice president and treasurer of Insilco Corp . 
President Bush is considering casting a line-item veto as a test to determine whether the courts will rule that he has such authority . 
Mr. Bush has long campaigned for passage of a bill or a constitutional amendment that would explicitly give him a line-item veto , which would enable him to kill individual items in a big spending bill without having to kill the entire bill . 
He has argued that such presidential power is necessary to rein in congressional spending . 
But some analysts , particularly conservative legal scholars , have urged Mr. Bush not to wait for explicit authorization but simply to assert that the Constitution already implicitly gives him the power to exercise a line-item veto . 
Such an assertion most likely would bring about a court challenge from Congress that would clarify whether a president already has such power . 
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater , confirming comments made this week by Vice President Dan Quayle , said Mr. Bush is `` interested '' in finding a suitable test case . 
But he also said that exercising a test line-item veto is n't a `` top initiative '' on the president 's agenda because he faces more-pressing budget issues at the moment . 
Harris Ravine , executive vice president of customer satisfaction , was named executive vice president , finance and administration of this maker of data storage equipment . 
Mr. Ravine succeeds William R. Mansfield Jr. , who will remain with the company until the end of the year to support the transition and to complete important projects . 
The Bush administration said it is submitting a `` comprehensive '' proposal for overhauling agricultural trade that could help break an impasse in the current round of multilateral trade negotiations . 
The proposal reiterates the U.S. desire to scrap or reduce a host of trade-distorting subsidies on farm products . 
But it would allow considerable flexibility in determining how and when these goals would be achieved . 
The U.S. plan also would ease the transition to freer agriculture trade by allowing some countries to convert non-tariff barriers into tariffs that , together with existing tariffs , then would be phased out over 10 years . 
Trade Representative Carla Hills , who along with Agriculture Secretary Clayton Yeutter unveiled the proposal , said she is confident it will gain considerable support from the U.S. 's trading partners . 
Mr. Yeutter , seeking to allay European objections to an earlier U.S. plan that called for eliminating all farm-trade barriers by the year 2000 , said the new U.S. proposal would n't `` put farmers out of business '' but would only encourage them to `` grow what the markets desire instead of what the government wants . '' 
The U.S. is submitting the proposal today in Geneva , hoping that the initiative will spur members of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade to reach agreement on new trade rules before their current negotiating round concludes in December 1990 . 
Another U.S. proposal filed Monday urges more `` fair play '' in services trade , including predictable and clear rules and equality in the treatment of foreign and domestic service companies . 
Unlike the earlier U.S. farm-trade proposal which struck European countries as too extreme , the latest plan would provide some room for maneuver . 
For instance , the new U.S. package makes clear there would be a transition period during which GATT members could use a combination of tariffs and quotas to cushion their farmers from foreign competition . 
It also says countries could temporarily raise tariffs on certain products if they experience an unusually heavy volume of imports . 
Instead of proposing a complete elimination of farm subsidies , as the earlier U.S. proposal did , the new package calls for the elimination of only the most tradedistorting ones . 
Less objectionable ones would be subject only to some restraints , and others with a `` relatively minor trade impact '' would be allowed to continue under certain conditions . 
The new U.S. plan also would establish procedures to prevent countries from using health and sanitation rules to impede trade arbitrarily . 
The goal would be to resolve disputes such as one prompted by the European Community 's current attempt to bar imports of beef from hormone-treated U.S. cattle . 
The U.S. contends that the rules are n't justified on health grounds . 
To encourage more competition among exporting countries , the U.S. is proposing that export subsidies , including tax incentives for exporters , be phased out in five years . 
Procter & Gamble Co. , helped by a gain from a lawsuit settlement and continued growth overseas , posted a 38 % rise in fiscal first-quarter net income . 
Net for the quarter ended Sept. 30 climbed to $ 551 million , or $ 1.66 a share , from $ 400 million , or $ 1.18 a share , a year earlier . 
Per-share figures have been adjusted for a 2-for-1 stock split effective Oct. 20 . 
Sales increased 6 % to $ 5.58 billion from $ 5.27 billion . 
Earnings at the consumer-products giant were boosted by a gain of $ 125 million , or about 25 cents a share , stemming from last month 's settlement of litigation with three of P&G 's competitors over patents on P&G 's Duncan Hines cookies . 
Excluding the gain , P&G 's earnings were close to analysts ' predictions of about $ 1.40 a share for the quarter . 
Wall Street had expected a modest rise in the company 's domestic sales and earnings , and more substantial increases in overseas results . 
One factor helping sales and earnings was a 3 % price rise for most P&G products , except coffee , analysts said . 
Unit volume , or amount of products shipped , rose about 11 % in the international segment , with P&G continuing to win market share in Japan 's diaper and detergent markets . 
Jay Freedman , analyst with Kidder , Peabody & Co. , said P&G 's Always sanitary napkin , sold under the Whisper name in Japan , has firmly established itself as a leading brand . 
He figures P&G will expand its personal-care product line in Japan to `` continue that momentum . '' 
P&G 's U.S. shipments were up just 1 % , partly because the company decided to shift more promotions and sales for health and beauty products to the fiscal second quarter . 
Hugh Zurkuhlen , analyst with Salomon Bros. , predicts the shift will mean P&G 's sales growth in the second quarter will be `` in the double digits . '' 
Also slowing growth in the U.S. were lackluster results for P&G 's cooking oils , which had a strong year-earlier first quarter . 
Last year 's drought in the Midwest prompted retailers to stock up on oils ahead of anticipated price increases , boosting sales for Crisco and Puritan oils , analysts said . 
For fiscal 1990 , analysts expect P&G 's sales to continue to grow , with earnings climbing between 15 % and 20 % . 
Lynne Hyman , vice president of equity research for First Boston Corp. , expects P&G to post net of about $ 4.20 a share , on a post-split basis . 
`` But I 'm recognizing there 's a good chance they 'll do a bit better than that , '' she says . 
In fiscal 1989 , P&G earned $ 3.56 a share , adjusted for the stock split . 
One big factor affecting the fiscal second half will be the new stewardship of Edwin L. Artzt , who becomes chairman and chief executive officer in January . 
Because of his remarkable success turning around P&G 's international operations , analysts have high hopes for his tenure . 
`` If he does to the domestic operations what he did internationally , '' says Mr. Zurkuhlen , `` this company will earn $ 6 or $ 7 a share in a few years . 
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 was enacted to keep the promise of the Fifteenth Amendment and enable Southern blacks to go to the polls , unhindered by literacy tests and other exclusionary devices . 
Twenty-five years later , the Voting Rights Act has been transformed by the courts and the Justice Department into a program of racial gerrymandering designed to increase the number of blacks and other minorities -- Hispanics , Asians and native Americans -- holding elective office . 
In the 1980s , the Justice Department and lower federal courts that enforce the Voting Rights Act have required state legislatures and municipal governments to create the maximum number of `` safe '' minority election districts -- districts where minorities form between 65 % and 80 % of the voting population . 
The program has even been called upon to create `` safe '' white electoral districts in municipalities where whites are the minority . 
Although Section 2 of the act expressly disclaims requiring that minorities win a proportional share of elective offices , few municipal and state government plans achieve preclearance by the Justice Department or survive the scrutiny of the lower federal courts unless they carve out as many solidly minority districts as possible . 
The new goal of the Voting Rights Act -- more minorities in political office -- is laudable . 
For the political process to work , all citizens , regardless of race , must feel represented . 
One essential indicator that they are is that members of minority groups get elected to public office with reasonable frequency . 
As is , blacks constitute 12 % of the population , but fewer than 2 % of elected leaders . 
But racial gerrymandering is not the best way to accomplish that essential goal . 
It is a quick fix for a complex problem . 
Far from promoting a commonality of interests among black , white , Hispanic and other minority voters , drawing the district lines according to race suggests that race is the voter 's and the candidate 's most important trait . 
Such a policy implies that only a black politician can speak for a black person , and that only a white politician can govern on behalf of a white one . 
Examples of the divisive effects of racial gerrymandering can be seen in two cities -- New York and Birmingham , Ala . 
When they reapportion their districts after the 1990 census , every other municipality and state in the country will face this issue . 
New York City : 
Racial gerrymandering has been a familiar policy in New York City since 1970 , when Congress first amended the Voting Rights Act to expand its reach beyond the Southern states . 
In 1972 , the Justice Department required that the electoral map in the borough of Brooklyn be redrawn to concentrate black and Hispanic votes , despite protests that the new electoral boundaries would split a neighborhood of Hasidic Jews into two different districts . 
This year , a commission appointed by the mayor to revise New York 's system of government completed a new charter , expanding the City Council to 51 from 35 members . 
Sometime in 1991 , as soon as the 1990 census becomes available , a redistricting panel will redraw the City Council district lines . 
The Charter Revision Commission has made it clear that in response to the expectations of the Justice Department and the commission 's own commitment to enhancing minority political leadership , the new district lines will be drawn to maximize the number of solidly minority districts . 
Blacks and Hispanics currently make up 38 % of the city 's population and hold only 25 % of the seats on the council . 
Several of the city 's black leaders , including Democratic mayoral nominee David Dinkins , have spoken out for racial gerrymandering to accord blacks and Hispanics `` the fullest opportunity for representation . '' 
In this connection , it is important to note that several members of New York 's sitting City Council represent heterogeneous districts that bring together sizable black , Hispanic , and non-Hispanic white populations -- Carolyn Maloney 's 8th district in northern Manhattan and the south Bronx and Susan Alter 's 25th district in Brooklyn , for example . 
To win their seats on the council , these political leaders have had to listen to all the voices in their district and devise public policies that would benefit all . 
Often they have found that the relevant issue is not race , but rather housing , crime prevention or education . 
Birmingham , Ala. : 
The unusual situation in Birmingham vividly illustrates the divisive consequences of carving out safe districts for racial minorities . 
In Birmingham , which is 57 % black , whites are the minority . 
Insisting that they are protected by the Voting Rights Act , a group of whites brought a federal suit in 1987 to demand that the city abandon at-large voting for the nine member City Council and create nine electoral districts , including four safe white districts . 
The white group argued that whites were not fully and fairly represented , because in city-wide elections only black candidates or white candidates who catered to `` black interests '' could win . 
No federal court has ruled that the Voting Rights Act protects a white minority , but in June the Justice Department approved a districting plan for Birmingham that carves out three white-majority districts and six black-majority districts . 
Richard Arrington , Birmingham 's black mayor , lamented the consequences . 
`` In the past , people who had to run for office had to moderate their views because they could n't afford to offend blacks or whites , '' he said . 
`` Now you go to districts , you 're likely to get candidates whose views are more extreme , white and black , on racial issues . '' 
Two hundred years ago , critics of the new United States Constitution warned that the electoral districts for Congress were too large and encompassed too many different economic interests . 
A small farmer and a seaport merchant could not be represented by the same spokesman , they said . 
But James Madison refuted that argument in one of the most celebrated political treatises ever written , No. 10 of the Federalist Papers . 
Madison explained that a representative 's duty was to speak not for the narrow interests of one group but instead for the common good . 
Large , heterogeneous election districts would encourage good government , said Madison , because a representative would be compelled to serve the interests of all his constituents and be servile to none . 
Madison 's noble and unifying vision of the representative still can guide us . 
As long as we believe that all Americans , of every race and ethnic background , have common interests and can live together cooperatively , our political map should reflect our belief . 
Racial gerrymandering -- creating separate black and white districts -- says that we have discarded that belief in our ability to live together and govern ourselves as one people . 
Ms. McCaughey is a constitutional scholar at the Center for the Study of the Presidency in New York . 
The Justice Department has distributed these new guidelines for U.S. Attorneys prosecuting RICO cases . 
A related editorial appears today . 
Under { RICO } , the government may seek a temporary restraining order ( TRO ) upon the filing of a RICO indictment , in order to preserve all forfeitable assets until the trial is completed and judgment entered . 
Such orders can have a wide-ranging impact on third parties who do business with the defendants , including clients , vendors , banks , investors , creditors , dependents , and others . 
Some highly publicized cases involving RICO TROs have been the subject of considerable criticism in the press , because of a perception that pre-trial freezing of assets is tantamount to a seizure of property without due process . 
In order to ensure that the rights of all interested parties are protected , the Criminal Division has instituted the following requirements to control the use of TROs in RICO prosecutions . 
( It should be noted that these requirements are in addition to any other existing requirements , such as review by the Asset Forfeiture Office . ) : 
1 . As part of the approval process for RICO prosecutions , the prosecutor must submit any proposed forfeiture TRO for review by the Organized Crime and Racketeering Section . 
The prosecutor must show that less-intrusive remedies ( such as bonds ) are not likely to preserve the assets for forfeiture in the event of a conviction . 
2 . In seeking approval of a TRO , the prosecutor must articulate any anticipated impact that forfeiture and the TRO would have on innocent third parties , balanced against the government 's need to preserve the assets . 
3 . In deciding whether forfeiture ( and , hence , a TRO ) is appropriate , the Section will consider the nature and severity of the offense ; the government 's policy is not to seek the fullest forfeiture permissible under the law where that forfeiture would be disproportionate to the defendant 's crime . 
4 . When a RICO TRO is being sought , the prosecutor is required , at the earliest appropriate time , to state publicly that the government 's request for a TRO , and eventual forfeiture , is made in full recognition of the rights of third parties -- that is , in requesting the TRO , the government will not seek to disrupt the normal , legitimate business activities of the defendant ; will not seek through use of the relation-back doctrine to take from third parties assets legitimately transferred to them ; will not seek to vitiate legitimate business transactions occurring between the defendant and third parties ; and will , in all other respects , assist the court in ensuring that the rights of third parties are protected , through proceeding under { RICO } and otherwise . 
The Division expects that the prosecutor will announce these principles either at the time the indictment is returned or , at the latest , at the first proceeding before the court concerning the TRO . 
Sales of North American-built cars and trucks plunged 20.5 % in mid-October from a year earlier , as domestic manufacturers paid the price for heavy incentives earlier this year . 
`` People are waiting for { new } factory giveaways , '' said Ben Kaye , sales manager of Bob Brest Auto World in Lynn , Mass. , whose sales are slow . 
This trend appears to be especially true at General Motors Corp. , which used both dealer and consumer incentives to ignite sales in August and September . 
Since then , deliveries have slumped . 
GM 's car sales dropped 24.8 % in mid-October to 69,980 , while truck sales fell 26 % to 37,860 . 
GM also had dismal results in the first 10 days of the month , while other auto makers reported mixed results . 
All of the Big Three suffered in the just-ended period , however , with sales of all domestically made cars , including those built at Japanese-managed plants , falling 19 % to 158,863 from a year earlier . 
The seasonal adjusted annual selling rate was six million vehicles , a small improvement from the 5.8 million rate of early October , but a big drop from the 7.1 million rate a year ago . 
Sales of domestically made trucks also continued to be sluggish in mid-October , dropping 22.8 % to 94,543 from a year ago . 
The Big Three auto makers already have slashed fourth-quarter production plans 10.4 % below year-ago levels , but that may not be enough to prevent inventories from ballooning if sales do n't improve . 
Industry analyst John H. Qualls , a vice president with Hill & Knowlton in St. Louis , forecasts that domestic auto makers will have a 93-day supply of cars at the end of the year , even if car sales improve to a 6.5 million vehicle rate for the quarter . 
Ford Motor Co. reported a 21.2 % drop in sales of domestic-made cars to 46,995 and a 24.2 % drop in domestic trucks to 31,143 . 
The sales are being dragged down by a glut of 1989 vehicles , said Joel Pitcoff , a Ford analyst . 
The earlier use of incentives depleted the market of `` scavengers '' for bargain-basement 1989 cars , he said . 
Town & Country Ford in Charlotte , N.C. , still needs to move about 850 1989 cars and trucks . 
Business had been fairly strong until Hurricane Hugo hit the area , but has been down since . 
Chrysler Corp. also hit the rocks in mid-October . 
The No. 3 U.S. auto maker had a 23.7 % plunge in car sales to 22,336 and a 17.5 % drop in truck sales to 22,925 , which include its minivans and Jeeps . 
Honda Motor Co. , which continues to have short supplies of domestically made Accords , saw its sales of North American-built cars fall 14.1 % to 8,355 . 
But sales of domestic cars and trucks at Nissan Motor Corp. rose 26.1 % to 5,651 . 
A Nissan spokesman attributed the increase to the use of incentives this year and not a year ago and to higher fleet sales . 
Toyota Motor Corp. , which opened a plant in Georgetown , Ky. , last year , saw sales triple to 6,256 vehicles . 
a - Totals include only vehicle sales reported in the period . 
c - Domestic car 
d - Percent change greater than 999 % . 
x - There were 9 selling days in the most recent period and 9 a year earlier . 
Percentage differences based on daily sales rate rather than sales volume . 
Short interest in Nasdaq over-the-counter stocks rose 6 % as of mid-October , its biggest jump since 6.3 % last April . 
The most recent OTC short interest statistics were compiled Oct. 13 , the day the Nasdaq composite index slid 3 % and the New York Stock Exchange tumbled 7 % . 
The coincidence might lead to the conclusion that short-sellers bet heavily on that day that OTC stocks would decline further . 
As it happens , the Nasdaq composite did continue to fall for two days after the initial plunge . 
However , the short interest figures reported by brokerage and securities clearing firms to the National Association of Securities Dealers include only those trades completed , or settled , by Oct. 13 , rather than trades that occurred on that day , according to Gene Finn , chief economist for the NASD . 
Generally , it takes five business days to transfer stock and to take the other steps necessary to settle a trade . 
The total short interest in Nasdaq stocks as of mid-October was 237.1 million shares , up from 223.7 million in September but well below the record level of 279 million shares established in July 1987 . 
The sharp rise in OTC short interest compares with the 4.2 % decline in short interest on the New York Stock Exchange and the 3 % rise on the American Stock Exchange during the September-October period . 
Generally , a short seller expects a fall in a stock 's price and aims to profit by selling borrowed shares that are to be replaced later ; the short seller hopes the replacement shares bought later will cost less than those that were sold . 
Short interest , which represents the number of shares borrowed and sold , but not yet replaced , can be a bad-expectations barometer for many stocks . 
Among 2,412 of the largest OTC issues , short interest rose to 196.8 million shares , from 185.7 million in 2,379 stocks in September . 
Big stocks with large short interest gains as of Oct. 13 included First Executive , Intel , Campeau and LIN Broadcasting . 
Short interest in First Executive , an insurance issue , rose 55 % to 3.8 million . 
Intel 's short interest jumped 42 % , while Campeau 's increased 62 % . 
Intel makes semiconductors and Campeau operates department-store chains and is strained for cash . 
Meritor Savings again had the dubious honor of being the OTC stock with the biggest short interest position on Nasdaq . 
Meritor has headed the list since May . 
First Executive and troubled Valley National Corp. of Arizona were next in line . 
Short selling is n't necessarily bad for the overall market . 
Shorted shares must eventually be replaced through buying . 
In addition , changes in short interest in some stocks may be caused by arbitrage . 
For example , an investor may seek to profit during some takeover situations by buying stock in one company involved and shorting the stock of the other . 
Two big stocks involved in takeover activity saw their short interest surge . 
Short interest in the American depositary receipts of Jaguar , the target of both Ford Motor and General Motors , more than doubled . 
Nasdaq stocks that showed a drop in short interest included Adobe Systems , Class A shares of Tele-Communications and takeover targets Lyphomed and Jerrico . 
The NASD , which operates the Nasdaq computer system on which 5,200 OTC issues trade , compiles short interest data in two categories : the approximately two-thirds , and generally biggest , Nasdaq stocks that trade on the National Market System ; and the one-third , and generally smaller , Nasdaq stocks that are n't a part of the system . 
Short interest in 1,327 non-NMS securities totaled 40.3 million shares , compared with almost 38 million shares in 1,310 issues in September . 
The October short interest represents 1.04 days of average daily trading volume in the smaller stocks in the system for the reporting period , compared with 0.94 day a month ago . 
Among bigger OTC stocks , the figures represent 2.05 days of average daily volume , compared with 2.14 days in September . 
The adjacent tables show the issues in which a short interest position of at least 50,000 shares existed as of Oct. 13 or in which there was a short position change of at least 25,000 shares since Sept. 15 ( see accompanying tables -- WSJ Oct. 25 , 1989 ) . 
From the Sept. 30-Oct . 4 issue of The Economist : 
What defeated General Aoun was not only the weight of the Syrian army . 
The weight of Lebanon 's history was also against him ; and it is a history Israel is in danger of repeating . 
Like Lebanon , and however unfairly , Israel is regarded by the Arab world as a colonial aberration . 
Its best hope of acceptance by its neighbours lies in reaching a settlement with the Palestinians . 
Like Lebanon , Israel is being remade by demography . 
In Greater Israel more than half the children under six are Muslims . 
Within 25 years Jews will probably be the minority . 
Yet Israel will neither share power with all these Arabs nor , says its present prime minister , redraw its borders closer to its pre-1967 Jewish heartland . 
By not choosing one of these options , Israelis will condemn themselves , as the Maronites did , to perpetual war with the Muslims in their midst , and so to the internal erosion of their state . 
Unlike the Maronites , Israel 's Jews will not let themselves become the weakest force in a system of private armies ; Jerusalem will become Belfast before it becomes Beirut . 
But that is not much of a consolation to draw from the failure of General Aoun . 
The Nasdaq over-the-counter market did n't fully recover from a selling stampede , and closed down 1.2 % . 
The effects on the market of the mostly computer-driven sell-off among exchange-listed stocks irked many market makers , who watched the Nasdaq Composite Index tumble in sympathy with the Dow Jones Industrial Average , and then saw it get left behind in the subsequent rally . 
After plummeting 1.8 % at one point during the day , the composite rebounded a little , but finished down 5.52 , at 461.70 . 
In contrast , the industrial average recovered almost completely from its skid and closed down 0.1 % . 
The New York Stock Exchange Composite was 0.4 % lower for the day . 
As usual , the over-the-counter market 's biggest technology stocks were hardest hit . 
Microsoft , battered by profit taking in recent sessions , sank as much as 4 ; but it finished at 80 7\/8 , down 2 1\/4 on volume of one million shares . 
MCI Communications , the most active issue , finished down 5\/8 to 42 1\/8 . 
MCI traded as low as 41 3\/8 during the session . 
Other active stocks included Jaguar , whose American depositary receipts added 1\/8 to 11 1\/4 . 
Apple Computer improved 7\/8 to 47 5\/8 ; Intel slipped 1\/4 to 33 1\/4 , and Valley National Corp. was up 1\/8 to 15 1\/8 . 
`` The market started with several strikes against it , '' said Peter DaPuzzo , head of retail equity trading at Shearson Lehman Hutton , referring to news that the labor-management buy-out of UAL Corp. continued to unravel , and reports that the junk-bond market is disintegrating . 
But the computer-guided selling in response to those developments dealt a serious blow to the over-the-counter market , Mr. DaPuzzo said . 
Even though the over-the-counter market usually does n't fall by as much as listed stocks during program-selling blitzes , he said , `` when the market does recover , the damage is done and it leaves Nasdaq down more than the Big Board . '' 
Mr. DaPuzzo also complained that the sharp swings in stock prices lately is scaring away retail and foreign investors . 
While Shearson does n't do computer-guided program trading for its own account , the firm does execute orders for clients involved in the buying and selling of shares tied to movements in certain stock indexes , Mr. DaPuzzo acknowledged . 
The volatility inherent in program trading troubled other traders , too . 
They do n't like the risks they are forced to assume when prices swing so drastically . 
Market makers are supposed to keep supplies of stocks on hand to maintain orderly trading when imbalances occur . 
That means that on days when prices are tumbling and sellers abound they must be willing to buy shares from sellers when no one else will . 
In such an environment , a market maker can absorb huge losses . 
But the recent volatility in stock prices caused by the program trading has made some market makers less willing to soak up the stocks that are for sale . 
The market makers say they are n't comfortable carrying big positions in stocks because they realize prices can tumble quickly . 
The situation makes it harder to buy and sell shares quickly , exacerbating the rise and fall in stock prices during program-dominated trading . 
Groused Robert Antolini , head of over-the-counter trading at Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette : `` It 's making it tough for traders to make money . '' 
He said that when sell programs kick in , many traders believe that `` there 's no sense in sticking your nose out because you 're an instant loser . '' 
Kinder-Care Learning Centers added 1\/4 to 4 7\/8 on 461,200 shares . 
Lodestar Group said it will make a $ 6-a-share offer for the remaining Kinder-Care Learning Center common stock if it acquires a majority of the company 's shares in a pending rights offering by Kinder-Care Learning Center 's parent , Kinder-Care Inc . 
Shares of KinderCare Inc. closed at 3 1\/2 , also up 1\/4 , on volume of 700,000 . 
Ohio Casualty dropped 2 1\/8 to 49 1\/2 . 
The company posted third-quarter earnings of 95 cents a share , down from $ 1.26 a year earlier . 
The company estimated that losses from Hurricane Hugo reduced net income by 32 cents a share in the most recent quarter . 
The company said losses from the Oct. 17 earthquake in California have n't yet been determined , but that it provides earthquake coverage to about 1,400 properties in the stricken area . 
Any quake-related losses will be reported in the fourth quarter , the company said . 
North Atlantic Industries jumped 1 to 5 3\/4 . 
The electronics-instruments maker is to be acquired by Asset Management Associates for $ 7.25 a share . 
LIN Broadcasting slid 1 3\/8 to 108 3\/4 , despite reporting third-quarter net of 46 cents a share , up from 39 cents the previous year . 
The company said the latest quarter included about $ 3.4 million in special legal and financial advisory costs related to McCaw Cellular Communications ' bid for the company and LIN 's merger pact with BellSouth . 
McCaw was unchanged at 40 . 
XL / Datacomp slid 2 1\/4 to 16 1\/2 amid continuing concerns about the company 's contract negotiations with International Business Machines . 
IBM is reviewing its entire business-partners program , and XL / Datacomp confirmed earlier this month that it was in talks with the company about possible modifications to its current IBM-remarketer contract . 
Remarketers make modifications to IBM 's computer hardware and resell the products . 
Omni Capital Group surged 1 3\/4 to 16 1\/4 . 
The company said net rose to 38 cents a share in its fiscal-first quarter ended Sept. 30 , from 35 cents a shares a year ago . 
Probably the most clear-cut Soviet violation , for example , is the Krasnoyarsk radar . 
-- `` Arms Control Reality , '' Nov. 20 , 1984 , the first of some 20 Journal editorials saying that Krasnoyarsk violated the ABM treaty . 
-- `` Whether the installation is for early warning or space track , it clearly is not deployed , '' the lawmakers said . 
`` Thus we judge it to be not a violation of the ABM treaty at this time . '' 
The delegation included a reporter from the New York Times , aides to Sen. Edward M. Kennedy and Rep. Les AuCoin , and Natural Resources Defense Council staff members . 
-- The Washington Post , Sept. 9 , 1987 . 
-- The U.S.S.R. has taken unprecedented unilateral measures of openness , by giving American representatives a possibility to inspect the building site of the Krasnoyarsk radar as well as radar vans in the areas of Gomel and Moscow , so as to see for themselves that there are no violations of the ABM treaty of 1972 on the part of the Soviet Union . 
-- Letter from Eduard Shevardnadze to U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar , reported in Tass , June 10 , 1988 . 
-- The construction of this station equal in size to the Egyptian pyramids constituted , I say it directly , a clear violation of ABM . 
-- Eduard Shevardnadze , Oct. 23 , 1989 . 
We 're happy , we guess , to receive confirmation of the Krasnoyarsk violation from the Soviets , five years after we started writing about it . 
Perhaps even the American apologists will now accede . 
Without question , something intriguing is going on in the policy chambers of the Politburo . 
As it bids for new agreements , new loans and indeed admission to the civilized world , the Soviet government has recognized it has a credibility problem . 
So after 70 years , it is confessing the obvious , hoping to be believed about other things . 
It 's not enough . 
If the Soviets want to be believed , they need to start telling the truth about more than the totally obvious . 
Our own test of `` glasnost 's '' authenticity would be a Soviet decision to open itself to a complete international examination of one of the most troubling mysteries in U.S.-Soviet relations -- the reported 1979 anthrax outbreak at a Soviet military facility in Sverdlovsk . 
The U.S. government has never waivered in its assessment of this incident as an accident at a biological weapons facility there , and hence a violation of the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention . 
The Pentagon 's recently issued `` Soviet Military Power , '' though in general adopting a softer line , repeated the Sverdlovsk assessment . 
It also was detailed in Congressional testimony this past February : An explosion at the Microbiology and Virology Institute in Sverdlovsk released anthrax germs that caused a significant number of deaths . 
Since Mr. Shevardnadze did not address this topic before the Supreme Soviet , the Soviet Union 's official position remains that the anthrax deaths were caused by tainted meat . 
We doubt this claim just as we doubted Mr. Shevardnadze 's assurance last year that Krasnoyarsk did n't violate the ABM treaty . 
And just as we did not believe the tendentious claims of the Congressmen and arms-control advocates who visited Krasnoyarsk , we are in no way persuaded by the assent to the tainted-meat theory by a U.S. team of scientists who met with Soviet counterparts in Washington last year . 
The Soviets ' explanation is that the anthrax came from one lot of animal feed made from the bones of cattle that grazed on soil that was naturally infected with anthrax spores . 
Harvard 's Matthew Meselson -- who we read has sold something called the `` scientific community '' on the notion that `` yellow rain '' attacks on the Laotian Hmong were in fact the result of fecal showers by giant bees -- found the Soviet anthrax scenario `` completely plausible . '' 
We do n't believe it . 
And we certainly do not believe that Mr. Gorbachev or any of his emissaries yet deserve to have the West take their word for it . 
Sverdlovsk is a large gray cloud over glasnost and indeed over the legitimacy of the arms-control process itself . 
The U.S. government 's Sverdlovsk complaint , as with Krasnoyarsk , is no mere political posturing . 
Biological weapons violations have figured little in political debate , and indeed have not been pressed vigorously enough by the U.S. government . 
But the stated U.S. position is detailed and specific , and the prospect of biological warfare is profoundly chilling . 
The Soviets should be willing to set in motion a process that would allow them to acknowledge that Sverdlovsk violated the 1972 agreement or , alternatively , that would give U.S. specialists reasonable confidence that this was a wholly civilian accident . 
Until that happens , glasnost can not begin to deserve the kind of credibility Mr. Shevardnadze was bidding for with his confessions on Monday . 
Manville Corp. said it offered to buy $ 500 million of its convertible preferred stock from the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust in a move that would improve the trust 's liquidity and reduce the potential number of Manville shares outstanding . 
Manville said it made the offer within the past several weeks as part of an effort to improve shareholder value . 
It said it would purchase the stock at market price . 
Manville and a spokeswoman for the trust said that the two are discussing the proposal but a decision has n't been made . 
`` We are considering that offer along with all other alternatives , '' the trust spokeswoman said . 
`` We need to look at how to maximize our cash flow to pay our beneficiaries . '' 
The trust , created as part of Manville 's bankruptcy-law reorganization to compensate victims of asbestos-related diseases , owns 7.2 million of the Series A convertible preferred shares , which are each convertible into 10 Manville common shares . 
The trust also owns half of Manville 's 48 million common shares outstanding . 
Based on Manville 's closing price yesterday of $ 9.25 a share , Manville 's offer would purchase about 5.4 million of its preferred shares , or about 75 % of the trust 's preferred stock holding . 
In addition to the stock and 20 % of Manville 's profits beginning in 1992 , the trust is supposed to receive $ 2.5 billion over its 27-year life . 
But it initially was funded with about $ 765 million and may soon face a cash crunch . 
As of June 30 , it had settled about 15,000 of 81,000 claims filed and its unpaid claims totaled $ 136 million , a large portion of its $ 268 million in cash and marketable securities . 
Since most of its assets are tied to Manville , a forest and building products concern , the trust might also want to diversify its holdings . 
As part of its offer , Manville said it requested changes in some covenants between it and the trust to allow Manville to `` reflect a more typical corporate ownership and financial structure . '' 
A Manville spokesman would n't elaborate on the proposed changes . 
But he said they are `` to a large degree , housekeeping , '' although some may generate some disagreement . 
Manville said the shares issued to the trust were intended to be sold , as needed , and that Manville has the right of first refusal to buy those shares . 
Northeast Utilities raised its bid for Public Service Co. of New Hampshire , which is operating under Bankruptcy Code protection , to $ 2.25 billion from $ 1.85 billion . 
Northeast 's raised bid , which was supported by PS of New Hampshire 's official shareholder committee , is a prelude to what is expected to be a round of higher bids by the other groups trying to acquire the company , the largest utility in New Hampshire . 
The $ 2.25 billion value claimed by Northeast , based in Hartford , Conn. , is the highest yet given to a bid . 
Some of the three other bidding groups are expected to increase their offers tomorrow , a date set for revised offers by a bankruptcy court judge . 
A hearing is set for Nov. 15 , but participants do n't expect a resolution until July 1990 . 
Under the new Northeast Utilities plan , it would pay $ 1.65 billion in cash to creditors and assume $ 100 million in pollution control bonds . 
Secured creditors would recover both principal and interest , while unsecured creditors would receive only principal and interest accrued before PS of New Hampshire filed for Bankruptcy Code protection in January 
The biggest change in Northeast 's offer was in improvements made for equity holders who had been given short shrift previously . 
Assuming full operation of the Seabrook nuclear power plant , which is completed but is n't yet operating , equity holders would receive up to $ 500 million in cash , preferred stock and new 10-year Seabrook bonds . 
Northeast 's previous offer had proposed that equity holders receive just $ 165 million . 
In addition , Northeast promised the State of New Hampshire that rate increases would be limited to 5.5 % annually for seven years . 
Its previous proposal had conditioned rate limits on Seabrook operations and other contingencies . 
Wilbur Ross , financial adviser to the equity holders said , `` Given the state 's strong bargaining position ... we believe the NU plan provides the best recovery available '' to PS of New Hampshire 's equity holders . 
Officials of PS of New Hampshire could n't be reached for comment . 
The company has filed an internal reorganization plan it valued at $ 2.2 billion that would require 5.5 % rate increases . 
That plan would leave existing preferred shareholders with at least a 41 % stake and give common shareholders as little as 13 % . 
New England Electric System , Westborough , Mass. , has proposed buying the company for $ 2 billion as part of a plan that would require rate increases of only 4.8 % annually for seven years . 
The state of New Hampshire has favored that plan . 
The other bidder is United Illuminating Co. , New Haven , Conn. , with a bid valued at $ 2.2 billion and and a proposal for seven years of 5.5 % rate increases . 
The Polish rat will eat well this winter . 
Tons of delectably rotting potatoes , barley and wheat will fill damp barns across the land as thousands of farmers turn the state 's buyers away . 
Many a piglet wo n't be born as a result , and many a ham will never hang in a butcher shop . 
But with inflation raging , grain in the barn will still be a safer bet for the private farmer than money in the bank . 
Once again , the indomitable peasant holds Poland 's future in his hands . 
Until his labor can produce a profit in this dying and distorted system , even Solidarity 's sympathetic new government wo n't win him over . 
In coming months , emergency food aid moving in from the West will be the one buffer between a meat-hungry public and a new political calamity . 
Factory workers on strike knocked Poland 's Communist bosses off balance last year ; this year , it was the farmers who brought them down . 
In June , farmers held onto meat , milk and grain , waiting for July 's usual state-directed price rises . 
The Communists froze prices instead . 
The farmers ran a boycott , and meat disappeared from the shops . 
On Aug. 1 , the state tore up its controls , and food prices leaped . 
Without buffer stocks , inflation exploded . 
That was when the tame old Peasants ' Party , desperate to live through the crisis , broke ranks with the Communists and joined with Solidarity in the East Bloc 's first liberated government . 
But by the time Solidarity took office in September , the damage was done . 
`` Shortageflation , '' as economists have come to call it , had gone hyper . 
The cost of raising a pig kept bounding ahead of the return for selling one . 
The farmers stayed angry . 
They still are . 
At dawn on a cool day , hundreds travel to the private market in Radzymin , a town not far from Warsaw , hauling pigs , cattle and sacks of feed that the state 's official buyers ca n't induce them to sell . 
Here , they are searching for a higher price . 
In a crush of trucks and horse carts on the trodden field , Andrzej Latowski wrestles a screeching , overweight hog into the trunk of a private butcher 's Polish Fiat . 
`` Of course it 's better to sell private , '' he says , as the butcher trundles away . 
`` Why should anybody want to sell to them ? '' 
The young farmer makes money on the few hogs he sells here . 
He wo n't for long , because his old state sources of rye and potatoes are drying up . 
`` There 's no feed , '' he says . 
`` You ca n't buy anything nowadays . 
I do n't know why . '' 
Edward Chojnowski does . 
His truck is parked across the field , in a row of grain sellers . 
Like the others , it is loaded with rye , wheat and oats in sacks labeled `` Asbestos . Made in U.S.S.R . '' 
The farmer at the next truck shouts , `` Wheat ! 
It 's nice ! 
It wo n't be cheaper ! 
We sell direct ! '' 
A heavy , kerchiefed woman runs a handful through her fingers , and counts him out a pile of zlotys . 
`` Country people breed pigs , '' says Mr. Chojnowski , leaning against the back of his truck . 
`` They ca n't buy feed from the state . 
There is n't enough . 
Some state middlemen come to buy from me . 
I sell -- a little . 
I am waiting . 
I have plenty more at home . '' 
On this morning , he does n't sell much in Radzymin , either . 
At closing time , farmers cart out most of what they carted in . 
A private market like this just is n't big enough to absorb all that business . 
The hulk of Stalinism , it seems , will not quickly crumble away . 
State monopolies will keep on stifling trade , `` free '' prices or not , until something else replaces them . 
Polish agriculture will need a whole private network of procurement , processing and distribution -- plus a new manufacturing industry to supply it with tractors , pesticides , fertilizers and feed . 
The Communists spent 40 years working to ensure that no such capitalistic structures ever arose here . 
Building them now will require undergirding from the West , and removal of political deadwood , a job that Solidarity has barely started . 
But Polish agriculture does possess one great asset already : the private farmer . 
`` We are dealing with real entrepreneurs , '' says Antoni Leopold , an economist who advises Rural Solidarity , the union 's countryside offshoot . 
`` There are a lot of them , and they have property . '' 
Polish peasants , spurning the collectivizers , were once a source of shame to orthodox Communists . 
Now , among Communist reformers , they are objects of envy . 
Food is the reformer 's top priority , the key to popular support . 
As the Chinese have shown and the Soviets are learning , family farms thrive where collectives fail . 
Ownership , it seems , is the best fertilizer . 
The Poles have had it all along . 
Poland 's 2.7 million small private farms cover 76 % of its arable land . 
On it , a quarter of the country 's 39 million people produce three-quarters of its grain , beef , eggs and milk , and nine-tenths of its fruit , vegetables and potatoes . 
Like the Roman Catholic Church , the Polish peasant is a pillar of the nation . 
Try as they might , the Communists could neither replace nor break him . 
And they did try . 
A few miles past Radzymin , a dirt road narrows to a track of sand and leads into Zalubice , a village of tumbledown farms . 
Czeslaw Pyszkiewicz owns 30 acres in 14 scattered scraps . 
He grows rye and potatoes for a few hens , five cows and 25 piglets . 
In patched pants and torn shoes , he stands in his barnyard eyeing the ground with a look both helpless and sardonic . 
`` It 's bad soil , '' he says . 
Until 1963 , it was good soil . 
Then the state put in a reservoir to supply the area with drinking water . 
Farmers lay down before the bulldozers . 
Their protest was ignored . 
The dam caused the water level to drop in Zalubice . 
Mr Pyszkiewicz smiles and his brow furrows . 
He expected as much . 
In his lifetime , 47 years , the Communists brought electricity to his village and piped in drinking water from the reservoir . 
No phones . 
No gas . 
`` We wanted them to build a road here , '' he says . 
`` They started , and then abandoned it . '' 
A tractor , his only mechanized equipment , stands in front of the pigsty . 
`` It 's Russian . 
Good for nothing . 
Parts are a tragedy . 
Even if I had a lot of money , I could n't buy what I need . '' 
The farmer can say the same for coal , cement , saw blades . 
In Poland , only 4 % of all investment goes toward making things farmers want ; in the West , it is closer to 20 % . 
The few big state farms take first crack at what does get made . 
They use 60 % more fertilizer per acre , twice the high-grade feed . 
Yet their best boast is that they produce 32 % of Polish pork . 
`` I 've heard from friends that state farms are subsidized , '' Mr. Pyszkiewicz says as his wife , Wieslawa , sets some chairs out in the sun . 
`` We have one near here . 
There is a lot of waste . 
A private farmer never wastes anything . '' 
The state quit shoving peasants onto its subsidized farms over 30 years ago . 
But it never did let up on the pressure . 
Until recently , a farmer with no heir had to will the state his land to collect his pension . 
The pension 's size still depends on how much produce he sells the state . 
His allotment of materials also did , until the state could n't hold up its end of that bargain . 
Yet the state alone sells seeds and machines . 
When supplies are short , it often hands them over only in exchange for milk or grain . 
A private farmer in Poland is free to buy and sell land , hire help , decide what to grow and how to grow it . 
He is free to invest in chickens , and to fail for lack of chicken wire . 
He has plenty of freedom -- but no choices . 
`` I 'm on my own land , '' Mr. Pyszkiewicz says . 
`` I do n't have to listen to what anybody tells me to do . '' 
`` Sometimes , '' says his wife , `` we 're happy about that . '' 
By starving the peasant , the Communists have starved Poland . 
Villages like Zalubice exist in a desert of poor schools and few doctors . 
Farm income is 15 % below the average . 
The young leave , especially girls who wo n't milk cows by hand . 
Some men stay , their best friend a bottle of vodka , but two million acres have gone fallow . 
Without machines , good farms ca n't get bigger . 
So the potato crop , once 47 million tons , is down to 35 million . 
Meat consumption is at 1979 's level , pork production at 1973 's , milk output at 1960 's . 
If a food crisis undid the Communists , a food revolution will make Solidarity . 
The potential is displayed along every road into Warsaw : row upon row of greenhouses , stretching out behind modern mansions that trumpet their owners ' wealth . 
Vegetables are abundant and full of flavor in Poland , the pickles and sauerkraut sublime , the state monopolies long broken . 
Grain , milk and meat come next . 
A private challenge to the monolithic tractor industry will take more time and money than Poland can spare , although a smokehouse or a local dairy can spring up fast . 
Poland makes no machinery for a plant on that scale . 
Solidarity wants it from the West . 
Maria Stolzman , one of its farm experts , lays it on the line : `` The World Bank will be brought in to help us destroy the old system . '' 
Felix Siemienas is destroying it now . 
He packs pork . 
A law went on the books in January that let him smoke bacon without breeding pigs . 
He cashed in . 
Poland is short on enterprises , not enterprise . 
`` I pay a lot to the farmer and five times the state salary to my employees , '' he says . 
He is in Warsaw to open a shop . 
`` I hire transportation , and my customers have fresh cold cuts every day . 
I do n't subsidize anyone . 
Everyone around me lives well . 
Yes , my prices are high . 
If nobody buys , I bring my prices down . 
That 's the rule . 
That 's the market . '' 
Mr. Siemienas is making a fortune -- $ 10,000 a month , he says . 
He has bought some trendy Western clothes , and a green Mercedes with an American flag in the window . 
But the meat-processing machines he picked up are 50 years old . 
`` I do n't want expensive machines . 
If the situation changes , I 'll get stuck with them . '' 
That 's politics . 
By taking power in a deal with the Peasant Party 's onetime Communist stooges , Solidarity has spooked the rural entrepreneur . 
Rural Solidarity objected , to no avail , when Solidarity leader Lech Walesa accepted the Peasants ' support . 
It objected again in September when Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki reluctantly named a Peasant Party man as his agriculture minister . 
Both the Peasants and Rural Solidarity are forming new political parties for farmers . 
The Peasants can make a credible case , against Solidarity , that hell-bent reform will drive millions from the land . 
Next Spring , the two will battle in local elections . 
But until then , and probably long afterward , the Communists ' apparat of obstruction -- from the head of the dairy co-op to the village bank manager -- will stay planted in the Polish countryside . 
`` We know how to get from capitalism to socialism , '' Sergiusz Niciporuk is saying one afternoon . 
`` We do n't know how to get from socialism to capitalism . '' 
He farms 12 acres in Grabowiec , two miles from the Soviet border in one of Poland 's poorest places . 
Now he is mounting the steps of a stucco building in a nearby village , on a visit to the Communist administrator , the `` naczelnik . '' 
`` Many people in Poland hope this government will break down , '' says Mr. Niciporuk , who belongs to the local council and to Rural Solidarity . 
`` That 's what the naczelnik counts on . 
He is our most dangerous enemy . 
Every time he sees me , he gets very nervous . '' 
The farmer barges into the naczelnik 's office . 
A thin man in a gray suit looks up from a newspaper . 
Mr. Niciporuk sits . 
Anatol Pawlowski 's leg begins jiggling beneath his desk . 
`` Solidarity does n't care for the good of this region , '' he says after a few pleasantries . 
`` They want to turn everything upside down in a week . 
Mr. Niciporuk here wants 60 acres used at the moment by a state farm . 
He ca n't guarantee that he can use it any better . '' 
`` I am ready at any moment to compete with a state farm . '' 
The naczelnik averts his eyes . 
`` What have you got ? 
Not even a tractor . 
And you want to make wicker baskets , too . '' 
`` I can do five things at once -- to be a businessman . '' 
`` Big business , '' Mr. Pawlowski snorts in English . 
The farmer stands to go . 
The naczelnik stands , too . 
`` I care very much for this post , '' he says . 
`` Eight years I 've had it . 
A cultural center has been built , shops . 
Suddenly , I am not a comfortable man for Solidarity . 
I have accomplished too much . 
They want to do more . 
I wish them all the best ! '' 
The farmer leaves . 
And the naczelnik shuts his door . 
The House approved a short-term spending bill to keep the government operating through Nov. 15 and provide $ 2.85 billion in emergency funds to assist in the recovery from Hurricane Hugo and the California earthquake . 
The 321-99 roll call vote reflected broad support for the disaster assistance , but the cost to the Treasury is sure to aggravate budget pressures this year and next under the Gramm-Rudman deficit reduction law . 
By a lopsided 401-18 margin , the chamber rejected an effort to waive Gramm-Rudman for purposes of addressing the two disasters , and budget analysts estimate the increased appropriations will widen the fiscal 1990 deficit by at least $ 1.44 billion unless offsetting spending cuts or new revenues are found by Congress . 
The budget impact will be greater still in fiscal 1991 , and the issue forced a confrontation between the Appropriations Committee leadership and Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta , whose California district was at the center of the earthquake last week . 
Going to the well of the chamber , Mr. Panetta demanded the costs be fully counted . 
His prominent role put him in the awkward position of challenging the very committee members on whom his state will be most dependent in the months ahead . 
`` We do not come to this House asking for any handout , '' said the California Democrat . 
`` We do not intend to hide these costs from the American people . '' 
The $ 2.85 billion package incorporates $ 500 million for low-interest disaster loans , $ 1 billion in highway construction funds , and $ 1.35 billion divided between general emergency assistance and a reserve to be available to President Bush to meet unanticipated costs from the two disasters . 
The funds are in addition to $ 1.1 billion appropriated last month to assist in the recovery from Hugo , bringing the total for the two disasters to nearly $ 4 billion in unanticipated spending . 
Because of the vagaries of Gramm-Rudman , the immediate impact is relatively small . 
But the appropriations set in motion spending that adds to an already grim budget picture for fiscal 1991 . 
Within the appropriations process , the situation is even more difficult since the costs will be counted against the share of funds to be allocated to those subcommittees that recently have had the greatest difficulty in staying within the budget . 
The underlying bill approved yesterday is required to keep the government operating past midnight tonight , and this urgency has contributed to the speed -- and , critics say , mistakes -- that have accompanied the package of disaster assistance . 
The hastily drafted measure could hurt California by requiring it to put up more matching funds for emergency highway assistance than otherwise would be required . 
And the state 's delegation is fearful that the new funding will be counted against a separate $ 185 million in federal highway funds it would expect to receive under its normal allocation this year . 
Also , the high price of San Francisco real estate puts the state at odds with federal regulations more attuned to the national average . 
For example , disaster loans , which will go to small businesses and homeowners , offer credit as low as 4 % in some cases . 
But the San Francisco delegation finds itself asking that the cap per household be lifted to $ 500,000 from $ 100,000 to assist the hard hit but often wealthy Marina district . 
The Senate is expected to make some modifications today , but both the White House and Congress appear most anxious to speed final approval before tonight 's deadline . 
Administration pressure discourages any effort to add to total funding , and the Senate changes are expected to be largely technical -- dealing with highway aid and lifting the ceiling on total Small Business Administration loans to $ 1.8 billion to accommodate the increased activity expected . 
Yesterday 's floor action came as a House-Senate conference approved a nearly $ 8.5 billion fiscal 1990 military construction bill , representing a 5 % reduction from last year and making severe cuts from Pentagon requests for installations abroad . 
An estimated $ 25.8 million is allocated to continue work in Oman . 
But all funding is cut for the Philippines , and projects in South Korea are cut to $ 13.6 million , or less than a sixth of the administration 's request . 
Closer to home , the negotiators were more generous . 
An estimated $ 38.9 million was set aside for military installations in the home state of North Carolina Rep. W.G. Hefner , the House chairman . 
And $ 70.2 million would go to projects in Tennessee represented by his Senate counterpart and fellow Democrat , Sen. James Sasser . 
Texas and California are traditionally powerful within the conference , but equally striking is the dominance of Alaska , Pennsylvania and West Virginia because of their power elsewhere in the appropriations process . 
Senate Appropriations Committee Chairman Robert Byrd ( D. , W.Va . ) even added report language listing $ 49.4 million in projects he wants in the budget next year . 
No individual illustrated this mix of power more yesterday than Sen. Daniel Inouye ( D. , Hawaii ) , who chairs the Senate defense subcommittee . 
In the final trading , the House was insistent on setting aside $ 500 million to carry out base closings ordered to begin in fiscal 1990 . 
But it gave ground to Mr. Inouye on a number of projects , ranging from a $ 11 million parking garage here , to a land transfer in Hawaii , to a provision to assist the Makwah Indian Tribe in Washington state . 
The tribe is one of the poorest in the Pacific Northwest . 
Mr. Inouye , who chairs the select committee on Indian Affairs , used his power to move $ 400,000 from the Air Force to the Bureau of Indian Affairs to assist in renovating a decommissoned base to accommodate a drug and alcohol rehabilitation center . 
Meanwhile , House-Senate negotiators have tentatively agreed on a $ 3.18 billion anti-drug and anti-crime intitiative , cutting other federal spending 0.43 % to pay for it . 
A formal House-Senate conference is expected to ratify the accord later this week . 
Mobil Corp. is preparing to slash the size of its work force in the U.S. , possibly as soon as next month , say individuals familiar with the company 's strategy . 
The size of the cuts is n't known , but they 'll be centered in the exploration and production division , which is responsible for locating oil reserves , drilling wells and pumping crude oil and natural gas . 
Employees have n't yet been notified . 
Sources said that meetings to discuss the staff reductions have been scheduled for Friday at Mobil offices in New Orleans and Denver . 
This would be a second round of cuts by Mobil , which along with other oil producers and refiners reduced its work force by 15 % to 20 % during the mid-1980s as part of an industrywide shakeout . 
Mobil 's latest move could signal the beginning of further reductions by other oil companies in their domestic oil-producing operations . 
In yesterday 's third-quarter earnings report , the company alluded to a $ 40 million provision for restructuring costs involving U.S. exploration and production operations . 
The report says that `` the restructuring will take place over a two-year period and will principally involve the transfer and termination of employees in our U.S. operations . '' 
A company spokesman , reached at his home last night , would only say that there will be a public announcement of the reduction program by the end of the week . 
Most oil companies , including Mobil , have been reporting lower third-quarter earnings , largely as a result of lower earnings from chemicals as well as refining and marketing businesses . 
Individuals familiar with Mobil 's strategy say that Mobil is reducing its U.S. work force because of declining U.S. output . 
Yesterday , Mobil said domestic exploration and production operations had a $ 16 million loss in the third quarter , while comparable foreign operations earned $ 234 million . 
Industrywide , oil production in this country fell by 500,000 barrels a day to 7.7 million barrels in the first eight months of this year . 
Daily output is expected to decline by at least another 500,000 barrels next year . 
Some Mobil executives were dismayed that a reference to the cutbacks was included in the earnings report before workers were notified . 
One Mobil executive said that the $ 40 million charge related to the action indicates `` a substantial '' number of people will be involved . 
Some will likely be offered severance packages while others will be transferred to overseas operations . 
The Justice Department is in the process of trying to gain control over a law that federal Judge David Sentelle recently called a `` monster . '' 
Needless to say , he was talking about RICO . 
With its recently revised guidelines for RICO , Justice makes it clear that the law currently holds too many incentives for abuse by prosecutors . 
The text of the `` new policy '' guidelines from the Criminal Division are reprinted nearby . 
They strongly suggest that Justice 's prosecutions of Drexel Burnham Lambert , Michael Milken and Princeton / Newport violated notions of fundamental fairness . 
Justice is attempting to avoid a replay of these tactics . 
This amounts to an extraordinary repudiation of the tenure of New York mayoral candidate and former U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani , who was more inclined to gathering scalps than understanding markets . 
The new guidelines limit the pretrial forfeitures of assets of RICOed defendants and their investors , clients , bankers and others . 
This follows earlier new guidelines from the Tax Division prohibiting Princeton / Newport-like tax cases from masquerading as RICO cases . 
The forfeiture memo cited `` considerable criticism in the press , because of a perception that pre-trial freezing of assets is tantamount to a seizure of property without due process . '' 
It told prosecutors not to seek forfeitures if there are `` less intrusive '' alternatives , such as bonds , and in any case not to seek forfeitures `` disproportionate to the defendant 's crime . '' 
These changes come a tad late for Princeton / Newport , the first RICOed securities firm . 
It was forced into liquidation before trial when investors yanked their funds after the government demanded a huge pre-trial asset forfeiture . 
Princeton / Newport investors , including McKinsey & Co. and the Harvard endowment , made the rational decision to withdraw their money ; for the firm , the liquidation was sentence first , verdict later . 
Prosecutors wanted $ 23.8 million in forfeiture for alleged tax fraud of some $ 400,000 . 
The experience of Princeton / Newport and initiation of other RICO-forfeiture cases against legitimate businesses taught Drexel that a RICOed investment bank would be an ex-investment bank . 
Drexel therefore agreed instead to an arrangement allowing it to plea to charges `` which the company is not in a position to dispute '' because of RICO . 
Part of Drexel 's plea was to cut Mr. Milken loose . 
So after all the prosecutorial hoopla no one has established what , if anything , Drexel did wrong . 
So two cheers for the new rules . 
Justice has finally recognized its employees ' abuses , thanks largely to the demands for reform by former U.S. attorney in Washington Joseph diGenova , who wants to salvage RICO for real criminals . 
But prosecutorial guidelines are effective only if someone at Justice is willing and able to supervise hyperactive prosecutors . 
Judge Sentelle , of the appeals court in Washington , made this point at a Cato Institute conference last week in a remarkable speech titled , `` RICO : The Monster That Ate Jurisprudence . '' 
He said ours is supposed to be `` a government of laws not of men , '' and yet RICO defenders `` tell us that we should rely on prosecutorial discretion to protect against overbreadth of RICO . '' 
No prosecutorial guidelines , observed or unobserved , limit civil RICO cases by plaintiffs for damages . 
What now for Princeton / Newport officials , Drexel and Mr. Milken ? 
Justice should review these cases to see what other prosecutorial abuses may have occurred . 
We suspect that Justice will some day agree that only the complete repeal of RICO can guarantee an end to injustices in its name . 
`` The Famous Teddy Z , '' which CBS Inc. had hoped would emerge as one of the few bright spots in its otherwise lackluster prime-time schedule , is n't turning out to be the hit the network envisaged . 
Although the half-hour situation comedy seen Mondays at 9:30 p.m . Eastern and Pacific time is n't a candidate for cancellation , it is slated for fine-tuning and by next week the network may announce `` Teddy Z '' is moving to 8:30 p.m. from its 9:30 time slot , replacing `` The People Next Door , '' which became the first network show to be canceled this season . 
`` Teddy Z , '' which centers on a mailroom clerk-turned agent at a Hollywood talent agency , was scheduled in the coveted 9:30 p.m. slot to follow `` Murphy Brown , '' a situation comedy about a television news magazine , starring Candice Bergen . 
`` Teddy Z '' was boosted by favorable reviews and a network-wide promotional tie-in contest with K mart Corp . 
It was promoted on cable services , including MTV , Nick at Night and VH-1 , and premiered as the No. 22-rated show for the week . 
But five weeks after the premiere , the series has floundered . 
In figures released yesterday by A.C. Nielsen Co . `` Teddy Z , '' produced by the television unit of Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. , was in 37th place . 
Worse , every week it suffers audience drop-off from `` Murphy Brown '' and viewership on CBS picks up again once `` Teddy Z '' is over and is followed by `` Designing Women . '' 
`` There is strong indication that ` Teddy Z ' is not compatible with the shows it is surrounding , '' said John Sisk , senior vice president at J. Walter Thompson Co. , a unit of WPP Group PLC . 
Last week , `` Murphy Brown '' was viewed by 14.1 % of the available television households , while the number dropped to 12.6 % for `` Teddy Z '' and rose to 14.2 % for `` Designing Women . '' 
CBS executives said the program is also slated to undergo some plot changes . 
Creator Hugh Wilson , for example , included the lead character 's Greek family in the cast , `` but that is not the right focus anymore , '' said one CBS executive . 
Instead , CBS hopes the show will increasingly highlight the talent agency and the business of being an agent . 
`` We 're making adjustments on the show , yes , but nothing radical , '' said Craig Nelson , the story consultant on `` Teddy Z . '' 
`` But we hope to keep a balance between the office and the family . '' 
The opening credits are being redone , Mr. Nelson said , `` to make Teddy 's situation clear to viewers who have not been with us since the beginning . 
Those viewers find the show confusing . 
The stock market 's woes spooked currency traders but prompted a quiet little party among bond investors . 
Prices of long-term Treasury bonds moved inversely to the stock market as investors sought safety amid growing evidence the economy is weakening . 
But the shaky economic outlook and the volatile stock market forced the dollar lower against major currencies . 
The bond market got an early boost from the opening-hour sell-off in stocks . 
That rout was triggered by UAL Corp. 's announcement late Monday that the proposed management-labor buy-out had collapsed . 
The 80-point decline in the Dow Jones Industrial Average during the morning trading session touched off a flight to safety that saw investors shifting assets from stocks to Treasury bonds . 
At its strongest , the Treasury 's benchmark 30-year bond rose more than a point , or more than $ 10 for each $ 1,000 face amount . 
As the stock market recovered some of its losses later in the day , bond prices retreated . 
But analysts said the combination of a second consecutive decline in monthly durable-goods orders and lackluster mid-October auto sales helped prop up the Treasury market . 
A slowing economy and the implication of lower inflation and interest rates tend to bolster bond prices . 
On the surface , the decline in September durable goods -- only 0.1 % -- did n't appear very weak . 
But orders for non-defense capital goods , a precursor of future plant and equipment spending , were off 5.6 % after falling 10.3 % in August . 
Auto makers reported that mid-October sales were running at an annual rate of about 5.8 million units , far less than the 6.6 million units analysts had expected . 
Taken together , the auto-sales and durable-goods reports confirmed perceptions that the economy is bogging down . 
Although analysts do n't expect the Federal Reserve to ease credit policy soon , reports like those yesterday help build the case for lower rates . 
Now bond investors are looking toward next week 's report from national purchasing managers and the government 's October employment report as potentially prompting the Fed to lower rates . 
The stock market 's precipitous drop frightened foreign investors , who quickly bid the dollar lower . 
But as stock prices recovered some of the early losses , so did the U.S. currency . 
Although dealers said investors are becoming more bearish toward the dollar in the wake of the stock market 's recent troubles and as the U.S. economy weakens , the dollar ended down only modestly . 
In major market activity : Bond prices rose . 
The Treasury 's benchmark 30-year bond gained nearly half a point , or about $ 5 for each $ 1,000 face amount . 
The yield on the issue slipped to 7.89 % . 
The dollar retreated . 
In late New York trading the currency was quoted at 1.8355 marks and 141.45 yen , compared with 1.8470 marks and 141.90 yen Monday . 
`` Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous '' may be visiting some new venues in the near future . 
Judge Robert ( `` Maximum Bob '' ) Potter sentenced Jim Bakker to 45 years in the big house yesterday , while a Beverly Hills judge tucked away Zsa Zsa Gabor for three days , plus 120 hours of work with homeless women . 
Miss Gabor recanted her earlier-expressed fear of jailhouse lesbians . 
Mr. Bakker said he was guilty of sin but not fraud . 
We can only wonder who will be the next lost soul chosen to be America 's Celebrity Convict . 
Boeing Co. said Trans European Airways ordered a dozen 737 jetliners valued at a total of about $ 450 million . 
The 300 and 400 series aircraft will be powered by engines jointly produced by General Electric Co. and Snecma of France . 
Currently , Boeing has a backlog of about $ 80 billion , but production has been slowed by a strike of 55,000 machinists , which entered its 22nd day today . 
Last week , a mediator failed to rekindle talks between the company and the strikers , who have rejected a pay raise offer of 10 % over three years . 
When the good fairy assigned to Slovakia hovered over the cradle of Edita Gruberova many years ago in Bratislava , she sprinkled her with high E flats , sparkling Ds , clean trills , and coloratura ornaments silvery as magic dust . 
Maybe she could drop by at the Metropolitan Opera and bring along what she forgot , a little charm , a few smidgins of thespian skills and a nice wig . 
Cast as Violetta Valery in a new production of Verdi 's `` La Traviata , '' Ms. Gruberova last week did many things nicely and others not so well . 
It is n't every day that we hear a Violetta who can sing the first act 's high-flying music with all the little notes perfectly pitched and neatly stitched together . 
Never once did she gasp for air or mop her brow . 
She was as cool as a cucumber . 
But as you may know , things are not going well for Violetta . 
There are times when she must show a little emotion . 
She has TB , after all , and a weak-kneed lover ; and though a successful courtesan , she is just about overdrawn at the bank . 
Worse , her walls move all the time -- at least in this production . 
Just when Ms. Gruberova sat down away from her guests to cough in private , her salon began sliding around the stage ; her country hideaway also has a very active set of drapes . 
Hold on to those funny braids ! you wanted to caution her as the sets started to roll around once more . 
This is the most moving `` Traviata '' I 've ever seen . 
Normally , Violetta can go about her business without wondering whether she is moving as gracefully as the scenery . 
But this is a production designed and directed by Franco Zeffirelli and paid for by Sybil Harrington , who has no need to count her pennies , unlike Violetta , down to 20 louis at the opera 's end . 
Seeing all those millions in action , I was just so relieved that Ms. Gruberova , gawky thing that she is , did n't accidentally smother herself in a drape . 
Large and lavish , `` Traviata '' is another addition to the Met 's growing stock of cast-proof productions mostly by Mr. Zeffirelli . 
They have a life of their own and can be counted on to look good and perform whenever a cast is n't up to either . 
If a strike ever hits the Met , the company can still sell tickets to his `` Boheme '' and `` Turandot '' and boom out recordings ( of another era ) . 
Last week 's discerning audience gave a bigger hand to a greenhouse than to the tenor Neil Shicoff , who sang an aria inside it . 
Inexplicably costumed as a rabbinical student , tottering around on lifts , Mr. Shicoff hardly seemed the fellow to catch a fancy cocotte 's eye . 
I wish he could wear lifts in his voice . 
Not nearly in his best form , the tenor made dullish sounds along with his usual clumsy hand gestures . 
Maybe Mr. Z. was too busy taming his set to work with his naturally ungainly Alfredo . 
Or is it that Mr. Z. is getting a little tired of `` Traviata '' ? 
This is the same production already seen in Paris and Florence , and its scenic ideas echo the movie he made with Placido Domingo and Teresa Stratas . 
Decades earlier , Maria Callas sang the Dallas staging that introduced the flashback idea . 
In an invention that drives Verdi purists bananas , Violetta lies dying in bed during the prelude , rising deliriously when then she remembers the great parties she used to throw . 
The entire opera is her dream . 
Given the prelude 's thematic connections with the music preceding the last act , the idea is more worn than bad , though as luck would have it , for a change there actually was a conductor in the pit whom we wanted to hear , Carlos Kleiber , trying to make memorable music while we all waited for the bed lump to stir into song . 
Once she did so , the big-souled German maestro with the shaky nerves who so often cancels offered a limpid , flowing performance that in its unswagged and unswaggering approach was totally at odds with the staging . 
Of heart-pounding moments there were nearly none , and whether this has to do with Mr. Kleiber or the wooden cast is hard to say . 
In any event , Ms. Gruberova barely ventilated Violetta 's anguish in her long meeting with Wolfgang Brendel , who as Germont seemed fairly desperate trying to inject an Italianate lilt into his heavy , teutonic baritone . 
`` Di Provenza '' was n't much of an advertisement for sunny , southern France . 
Perhaps Mr. Kleiber could let him substitute one of the songs about dead children and dark nights from Mahler 's `` Kindertotenlieder . '' 
Speaking of dark nights , the Met 's next-door neighbor , the New York City Opera , has canceled its season after failing to reach a settlement with its musicians , who wanted pay parity with the the Chicago Lyric and San Francisco Opera orchestras . 
Well , they can now go and audition there . 
Good luck . 
Common sense suggests that people who play for a company that charges about half what those houses do for a ticket are not in the same market . 
The cancellation bodes poorly for a company already beset with an identity crisis exacerbated by the retirement of general director Beverly Sills and the amazing appointment of Christopher Keene as her successor after his years of feckless toiling in the pit . 
As the Met discovered years ago following a belated December opening , it is nearly impossible to recapture subscribers once they have had time to ponder their entertainment choices . 
I , for instance , was perfectly happy at Avery Fisher Hall the other day listening to Helmuth Rilling conduct the Messa per Rossini , a strange piece written by 13 different Italian composers to honor Rossini after his death in 1868 . 
Each of them contributed a section at the behest of Verdi , who was nearly driven to his own early grave by the troublesome arrangements . 
For all that , the piece landed unperformed in a dusty archive after Bologna refused to supply a chorus and orchestra . 
We know Verdi 's own contribution was mighty impressive since the operatic `` Libera me '' was reworked for the Manzoni Requiem , of which he wrote every note himself having learned his lesson . 
The surprising discovery of the evening at Fisher was the high standard achieved by some of his now-obscure colleagues , notably Raimondo Boucheron . 
His melodious `` Confutatis '' was smoothly sung by bass Brian Matthews . 
Also , Teodulo Mabellini 's `` Lux aeterna '' was intriguingly scored and splendidly put across by Mr. Rilling . 
He brought along his Stuttgart-based Gaechinger Kantorei chorus , and even better , the Czech soprano Gabriela Benackova . 
She was in her most radiant , expressive voice . 
Maybe she could step across the plaza to the Met -- where she has still to make her debut -- and help out her Czech compatriot by singing the slow parts of `` Traviata . '' 
The Tokyo International Film Festival was no match for the Cannes Film Festival in terms of prestige , but it made its mark : It awarded the largest cash prize of any film festival to young and first-time film makers . 
At this year 's event , the third since the festival got under way in 1985 , Idrissa Ouedraogo of Burkina Faso won the Sakura Gold prize of $ 143,000 for `` Yaaba '' ( `` Old Woman '' ) . 
By comparison , Cannes now gives $ 39,000 to the winner of its young director 's award . 
Says director George Miller ( `` Mad Max '' ) : `` I think the Tokyo festival may become known as a major attraction for young directors because of the money as well as the recognition . '' 
There are drawbacks . 
Vincent Tolentino , a correspondent for the French magazine Telerama , says of the recently ended Tokyo festival : `` No one makes deals ... and most of the films have been seen before at other festivals . '' 
Belgium decided that investors who demand the delivery of their securities when they buy shares or domestic bonds will have to pay an additional 100 Belgian francs ( about $ 2.60 ) for each transaction , bringing the total fee to 200 francs . 
While no figures exist , it is thought that many small investors in Belgium store securities privately , in some cases to avoid paying high inheritance taxes . 
The law could redound to the advantage of brokers and banks , who incur high administrative costs to deliver securities to investors . 
Japan is considering giving aid to Hungary and Poland to support their recent political reforms , a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry said . 
`` This is the first time , if we decide to do so , for Japan to extend aid of this kind to Eastern European countries , '' the spokesman said . 
He said Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu also is studying the possibility of a visit to the two Eastern bloc nations and to Western Europe next January . 
Drugs were a major issue in two days of talks between French President Francois Mitterrand and Spanish Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez . 
`` I demand the utmost severity in the fight against drug traffickers , '' President Mitterrand said after the meeting in Valladolid , Spain . 
He added : `` Banks must open their books . '' 
The leaders ' talks coincided with a meeting in Madrid of anti-drug experts from the U.S. , France , Italy , Spain , Peru , Bolivia and Colombia . 
That conference , which began yesterday , was expected to cover such matters as police training and extradition agreements , Spanish officials said . 
Three Soviet government officials -- the ministers of railroads , of foreign economic relations and of heavy-machine building -- will visit Tehran next month for talks , Iran 's official news agency reported . 
Under an agreement signed last June , the Soviets will help Iran in oil exploration and other areas in return for exports of Iranian natural gas . 
And in Paris , Mahmoud Vaezi , Iran 's vice minister of foreign affairs , began a five-day visit to discuss such matters as compensation to French enterprises for contracts broken by the Khomeini regime . 
Toto Co. , a Japanese ceramics maker , has developed a toilet that can check the user 's health . 
A Toto spokesman said the toilet not only tests blood pressure , pulse and urine , it also stores the data for up to 130 days . 
Nippon Telegraph & Telephone Corp. and Omron Tateisi Electronics are involved with Toto 's new product , which will go on the market in about two years time . 
`` It will be very expensive , '' the spokesman warned . 
`` The price can not be less than $ 7,000 . '' 
Since Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari took office last December , special agents have arrested more than 6,000 federal employees on charges ranging from extortion to tax evasion . 
Hector Castaneda Jimenez , chief prosecutor at the Attorney General 's Office , said that an estimated $ 82.8 million in government property and unpaid taxes have been recovered in the campaign to root out official corruption . 
Mr. Castaneda 's office will reportedly issue warrants during the next six months for the arrest of another 10,000 federal employees . 
Those employees are suspected of illegally gaining an estimated $ 376.8 million , the prosecutor was quoted as saying by the Excelsior news service . 
He added that federal agents hope to recover at least half that amount . 
`` The rest will probably not be recoverable either because the statute of limitations expired or because many prefer to spend additional time in jail rather than return the money , '' the prosecutor said . 
The United Nations , which is distributing farm tools to returning refugees in Namibia , is rethinking a plan to hand out machetes because of the tense political climate during preparations for independence from South Africa . 
`` The decision to distribute machetes at this time , which could be used as weapons , is under review , '' said a U.N. spokesman ... . 
Sources close to the family of Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto said she is expecting a second child , probably early next year . 
Cray Research Inc. forecast that 1990 will be a no-growth year for its supercomputer line . 
In what has become a series of bad-news announcements , the world 's largest maker of supercomputers said that after reviewing its order prospects , `` we have concluded it is prudent to plan for next year on the assumption that revenue again will be flat . '' 
Cray jolted the market in July when it slashed revenue and earnings projections for this year , citing a slowing economy that has delayed orders from government as well as commercial customers . 
The company made its 1990 projection -- an unusual event for Cray -- in announcing improved net income for the third quarter . 
Cray said it earned $ 30.6 million , or $ 1.04 a share , up 35 % from $ 22.6 million , or 73 cents a share , a year ago . 
Revenue gained 45 % to $ 210.2 million from $ 145.2 million . 
For the nine months , earnings totaled $ 36.6 million , or $ 1.24 a share , down 46 % from $ 68.1 million , or $ 2.19 a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue was $ 454.6 million , a 6.9 % gain from $ 425.4 million . 
Cray made its announcement after the stock market closed . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Cray closed down $ 1.125 at $ 34.25 . 
Cray said its order backlog at Sept. 30 was $ 315 million , down $ 25 million from June 30 . 
Marcello Gumucio , president , said the company `` did well in the quarter as far as revenues and earnings are concerned , and not quite as well in terms of signing orders . '' 
As for the current period , Mr. Gumucio said , `` We anticipate that fourth-quarter revenue and earnings will be substantially greater than any of the preceding three quarters , but not up to the record levels of last year 's fourth quarter '' when Cray earned $ 88.5 million , or $ 2.80 a share . 
He added that the company expects `` strong '' operating profit for the year , `` but at a level significantly lower than last year . '' 
He said 1989 's net income could be 11 % to 13 % of revenue , which , assuming current expectations , would be 40 % to 45 % below 1988 's level . 
Last year , Cray earned $ 156.6 million , or $ 4.99 a share , on revenue of $ 756.3 million . 
Next year `` looks dismal , '' said analyst Paul Luber of Robert Baird & Co. , Milwaukee . 
Noting that Cray does n't have a low-end supercomputer to compete with the likes of Convex Computer Corp. and International Business Machines Corp. , Mr. Luber said such a machine would be necessary `` to get things back on line here . '' 
Cray has indicated it will decide on whether to build such a machine before year end . 
Johnson & Johnson reported a 10 % rise in third-quarter net income on a 12 % sales increase - results that were driven particularly by new products including pharmaceuticals and the company 's professional operations . 
Net for the New Brunswick , N.J. , maker of health-care products climbed to $ 265 million , or 80 cents a share , from $ 240 million , or 71 cents a share , in the year-earlier period . 
Sales rose to $ 2.45 billion from $ 2.2 billion . 
The year-ago per-share earnings are adjusted to reflect a 2-for-1 stock split last May . 
In a statement , Ralph S. Larsen , chairman and chief executive officer , said the company was pleased with its third-quarter sales performance , `` especially in light of the extremely competitive environment in domestic consumer markets and the negative impact of unfavorable exchange rates this quarter . '' 
David J. Lothson , an industry analyst for PaineWebber Group Inc. , said Johnson & Johnson 's results slightly exceeded his expectations for the third quarter . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Johnson & Johnson shares fell 37.5 cents to $ 54.625 . 
Mr. Larsen noted `` substantial sales growth '' for the recently introduced Acuvue disposable contact lens and Hismanal , a once-a-day antihistamine . 
Eprex , used by dialysis patients who are anemic , and Prepulsid , a gastro-intestinal drug , did well overseas , he said . 
Despite health-care cost controls and programs to hold down inventory , the professional division , which makes products including sutures and surgical stapling equipment , `` achieved solid growth , '' Johnson & Johnson said . 
But domestic consumer sales slipped 1.2 % for the quarter , to $ 490 million from $ 496 million . 
The company cited softness in the retail health and beauty aids category , `` as well as the intense competition in the company 's sanitary protection product line . '' 
Overseas sales were stronger , principally because of a rebound in Brazil , where economic turmoil had hurt year-earlier results , Johnson & Johnson said . 
Mr. Lothson of PaineWebber said the company 's sales pace has been picking up largely because the effect of unfavorable exchange rates has been easing -- a pattern continuing this quarter . 
He cautioned , however , that a `` tough tax-rate comparison '' may slow the company 's earnings growth for the current quarter . 
For last year 's fourth quarter , the company 's tax rate was less than 20 % , he said . 
While the third period contained no major surprises , Mr. Lothson said , the results show how sensitive the multinationals can be to developments in a single country such as Brazil . 
He also questioned whether recent gains in that country can be sustained . 
The following issues were recently filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission : 
Bergen Brunswig Corp. , proposed offering of liquid yield option notes , via Merrill Lynch Capital Markets . 
Columbia Gas System Inc. , shelf offering of up to $ 200 million of debentures . 
Laserscope , initial offering of 1,656,870 common shares , of which 1,455,000 shares are to be sold by the company and 201,870 by holders , via Alex . Brown & Sons Inc. and Volpe , Covington & Welty . 
TeleVideo Systems Inc. , proposed offering of 1,853,735 common shares , to be sold by holders . 
Western Gas System Inc. , initial offering of 3,250,000 common shares , of which 3,040,000 shares will be sold by the company and 210,000 by a holder , via Prudential-Bache Capital Funding , Smith Barney , Harris Upham & Co. and Hanifen , Imhoff Inc . 
Insiders have been selling shares in Dun & Bradstreet Corp. , the huge credit-information concern . 
Six top executives at the New York-based company sold shares in August and September . 
Four of those insiders sold more than half their holdings . 
The stock , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , closed at $ 51.75 , up 62.5 cents , well below the $ 56.13 to $ 60 a share the insiders received for their shares . 
Much of the recent slide in Dun & Bradstreet 's stock came late last week , after negative comments by analysts at Merrill Lynch & Co. and Goldman , Sachs & Co . 
A company spokesman declined to comment and said that the officials who sold shares would n't comment . 
One of Dun & Bradstreet 's chief businesses is compiling reports that rate the credit-worthiness of millions of American companies . 
It also owns Moody 's Investors Service , which assigns credit-ratings to bonds and preferred stock ; A.C. Nielsen , known for its data on television-viewing patterns , and Yellow-pages publisher Donnelley . 
Last March , this newspaper reported on widespread allegations that the company misled many customers into purchasing more credit-data services than needed . 
In June , the company agreed to settle for $ 18 million several lawsuits related to its sales practices , without admitting or denying the charges . 
An investigation by U.S. Postal inspectors is continuing . 
Among the insider sales , Charles Raikes , the firm 's general counsel , sold 12,281 shares in August , representing 46 % of his holdings in the company . 
He received $ 724,579 for the shares , according to insider filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission . 
John C. Holt , an executive vice president and Dun & Bradstreet director , sold 10,000 shares on Aug. 31 for $ 588,800 , filings show . 
He retains 9,232 shares . 
William H.J. Buchanan , the firm 's secretary and associate general counsel , sold 7,000 shares in two separate sales in September for $ 406,000 . 
The shares represented 66 % of his Dun & Bradstreet holdings , according to the company . 
The other insiders , all senior or executive vice presidents , sold between 2,520 and 6,881 shares , representing between 8 % and 70 % of their holdings , according to SEC filings . 
Dun & Bradstreet 's stock price began its recent spiral downward last Wednesday , when the company reported third-quarter results . 
Net income rose to 83 cents a share from 72 cents a share the year-earlier period . 
But analysts focused more on the drop in revenue , to $ 1.04 billion from $ 1.07 billion , reflecting in part a continuing drop in sales of the controversial credit-reporting services . 
Last Thursday , Merrill Lynch securities analyst Peter Falco downgraded his investment rating on the firm , according to Dow Jones Professional Investors Report , citing a slowdown in the credit-reporting business . 
He cut his rating to a short-term hold from above-average performer and reduced his 1990 earnings estimate . 
Mr. Falco continues to rank the stock a longterm buy . 
The stock slid $ 1.875 on more than four times average daily volume . 
The stock received another blow on Friday , when Goldman Sachs analyst Eric Philo advised that investors with short-term horizons should avoid Dun & Bradstreet stock because it is unlikely to outperform the market . 
The stock fell 75 cents . 
Insider selling is not unusual at Dun & Bradstreet ; in fact , the recent pace of selling is just about average for the company , according to figures compiled by Invest / Net , a North Miami , Fla. , firm that specializes in tracking and analyzing SEC insider filings . 
But previous sales have often been sales of shares purchased through the exercise of stock options and sold six months later , as soon as allowed , said Robert Gabele , president of Invest / Net . 
The most recent sales do n't appear to be option-related , he said . 
TASTY PROFITS : 
Michael A. Miles , chief executive officer of Philip Morris Cos . ' Kraft General Foods unit , bought 6,000 shares of the company on Sept. 22 for $ 157 each . 
The $ 942,000 purchase raised his holdings to 74,000 shares . 
The stock split four-for-one on Oct. 10 . 
Mr. Miles 's newly purchased shares are now worth $ 1,068,000 , based on Philip Morris 's closing price of $ 44.50 , up 62.5 cents , in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday . 
A spokesman for Mr. Miles said he bought the shares because he felt they were `` a good investment . '' 
The executive made his purchases shortly before being named to his current chief executive officer 's position ; formerly he was Kraft General Foods ' chief operating officer . 
SHEDDING GLITTER : 
Two directors of Pegasus Gold Inc. , a Spokane , Wash. , precious-metals mining firm , sold most of their holdings in the company Aug. 31 . 
John J. Crabb sold 4,500 shares for $ 11.13 each , leaving himself with a stake of 500 shares . 
He received $ 50,085 . 
Peter Kutney sold 5,000 shares , all of his holdings , for $ 11.38 a share , or $ 56,900 . 
Gary Straub , corporate counsel for the company , said the directors sold for `` personal financial reasons . '' 
Both insiders declined to comment . 
On Wall Street , Merrill Lynch & Co. analyst Daniel A. Roling rates the stock `` neutral '' and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. lists it as a `` buy . '' 
Pegasus Gold `` has been on a lot of recommended lists as a junior growth company stepping into the big leagues , '' says Marty McNeill , metals analyst at Dominick & Dominick , a New York investment firm . 
`` It 's a good company , and growing ; there 's nothing that would warrant that it be sold . '' 
Yesterday , in composite trading on the American Stock Exchange , Pegasus closed at $ 10.125 , up 12.5 cents . 
Medieval philosophers used to hold the sensible belief that it was more perfect to exist than not to exist , and that to exist as a matter of necessity was most perfect of all . 
Now , only God exists as a matter of absolute necessity ; it is built into His nature . 
But since the time of Darwin , we humans could at least claim a sort of natural necessity for the existence of our species . 
Are n't we , after all , the inevitable culmination of that stately pageant called evolution ? 
If mutation and natural selection slowly but surely give rise to more and more advanced forms of life , then it was only a matter of eons before splendid beings endowed with reason , self-awareness and taste shimmered onto the scene . 
Now along comes Stephen Jay Gould to dash this flattering illusion . 
His credentials are excellent for the task . 
Star lecturer at Harvard , author of numerous popular books on science , and scourge of the creationist lobby , Mr. Gould is perhaps the world 's most eminent evolutionary theorist . 
Yet he puts quite a twist on the old story handed down from Darwin . 
For him , natural history is anything but a gradual , predictable march from primordial slime to human consciousness ; it is a careening , chaotic affair in which the emergence of a featherless biped was a one-in-a-million shot . 
In `` Wonderful Life : The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History '' ( Norton , 326 pages , $ 19.95 ) , Mr. Gould makes his case for `` the awesome improbability of human evolution . '' 
The argument turns on the discovery in 1909 of an amazing fossil quarry high in the Canadian Rockies called the Burgess Shale . 
Here , in an area smaller than a city block , lay buried traces of countless weird creatures that had frolicked more than 500 million years ago -- creatures whose anatomical variety far exceeded what can be found in all the world 's oceans today . 
Such an embarrassment of riches was inconceivable to the man who discovered the Burgess Shale , one Charles Doolittle Walcott . 
The received Darwinian wisdom of the day said that animals living so long ago must be simple in design , limited in scope and ancestral to contemporary species . 
Accordingly , the hidebound traditionalist reconstructed hypothetical organisms from the Burgess fossils in such a way that they could be shoehorned into familiar categories . 
It was not until the early 1970s that Cambridge Prof. Harry Whittington and two sharp graduate students began to publish a reinterpretation of the Burgess Shale . 
By making clever inferences about how the squashed and distorted fossil remains corresponded to three-dimensional structures , this trio was able to piece together a series of wondrous beasties quite unlike anything currently on the planet . 
One was so fantastic in appearance , it was dubbed Hallucigenia . 
Would that Mr. Gould 's minute descriptions of these creatures was always so colorful . 
A good deal of the book is boring , particularly the endless allusions to high and pop culture and the frequent jokes festooning the text . 
These turns do not provide sufficient relief from sentences like , `` Most modern chelicerates have six uniramous appendages on the prosoma . '' 
Interest picks up , though , when Mr. Gould gets around to discussing the meaning of the Burgess oddities for the theory of evolution . 
Not long after the appearance of life , evidently , there was an explosive proliferation in the number of animal designs seen on the earth . 
The vast majority of them , however , were wiped out by a succession of environmental upheavals that were too sudden and catastrophic for the normal rules of natural selection to operate . 
Consequently , the winnowing process was like a lottery `` in which each group { held } a ticket unrelated to its anatomical virtues . 
'' So much for survival of the fittest . 
So much , too , for the notion that we humans triumphed in the Darwinian struggle by evolving big brains . 
Our mammalian forerunners lucked out through the extraterrestrial impact that did in the dinosaurs because they were small , not smart . 
If anyone has difficulty imagining a world in which history went merrily on without us , Mr. Gould sketches several . 
In one , birds are the dominant carnivores ; in another the seas abound with `` little penises . '' 
Back when the Burgess fauna were flourishing , it seems , human evolutionary hopes hung on the survival of a little worm with a backbone called Pikaia . 
Mr. Gould finds this oddly exhilarating ; like an existentialist of old , he views our contingency as `` a source of both freedom and consequent moral responsibility . '' 
I , by contrast , can not help feeling that if some other curiosity from the Burgess Shale had survived instead , beings at once wiser and less boorish than Homo sapiens might have eventually gained earthly dominion . 
But even if no conscious life had evolved here at all , the universe is a big place , and given the right conditions , sympathetic to creating some form of life . 
Surely at some other cosmic address a Gouldoid creature would have risen out of the ooze to explain why , paleontologically speaking , `` it is , indeed , a wonderful life . '' 
Mr. Holt is a columnist for the Literary Review in London . 
The Justice Department scrambled to play down the significance of its new guidelines concerning prosecutions under the federal racketeering law . 
The guidelines were distributed to U.S. attorneys last summer but were disclosed for the first time by press reports this week . 
They discourage prosecutors , under certain circumstances , from seeking court orders seizing the assets of racketeering defendants prior to trial . 
But David Runkel , chief Justice Department spokesman , said the guidelines `` are a codification and a clarification far more than a new direction . '' 
Use of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law against white-collar defendants , as opposed to alleged organized-crime figures , has come under attack from some defense lawyers and legal scholars . 
Critics have complained that the law unfairly strips defendants of assets before a jury determines they have committed a crime and that aggressive use of the forfeiture provisions can ruin corporate defendants or force them into unfavorable plea bargains . 
In the new guidelines , the Justice Department says that in attempting to freeze disputed assets before trial , `` the government will not seek to disrupt the normal , legitimate business activities of the defendant '' and `` will not seek ... to take from third parties assets legitimately transferred to them . '' 
The guidelines also state , `` The government 's policy is not to seek the fullest forfeiture permissible under the law where that forfeiture would be disproportionate to the defendant 's crime . '' 
Another provision clarifies certain limits on when prosecutors may use tax-fraud charges as a basis for bringing a racketeering case . 
Mr. Runkel declined to speculate on whether the guidelines would curb racketeering prosecutions against corporate defendants . 
`` The impact , if there is any , will be impossible to judge ahead of time because the decision whether to use { racketeering charges } is made in individual cases '' by Justice Department officials in Washington , he said . 
In a memorandum describing the guidelines , Assistant Attorney General Edward Dennis Jr. said that government efforts to freeze defendants ' assets pending racketeering prosecutions `` have been the subject of considerable criticism in the press . '' 
But Mr. Runkel said the government is n't `` backing off on these kinds of matters at all . 
California legislators , searching for ways to pay for the $ 4 billion to $ 6 billion in damages from last week 's earthquake , are laying the groundwork for a temporary increase in the state 's sales tax . 
The talk of a sales tax rise follows a rebuff from Congress on the question of how much the federal government is willing to spend to aid in California 's earthquake relief efforts . 
The state had sought as much as $ 4.1 billion in relief , but yesterday the House approved a more general scaled-back measure calling for $ 2.85 billion in aid , the bulk of which would go to California , with an unspecified amount going to regions affected by Hurricane Hugo . 
That leaves the state roughly $ 2 billion to $ 4 billion short . 
A sales tax increase appears to be the fastest and easiest to raise funds in a hurry . 
According to the state department of finance , a one-penny increase in the state 's six-cent per dollar sales tax could raise $ 3 billion . 
Willie Brown , speaker of California 's Assembly , said that Gov. George Deukmejian has agreed to schedule a special session of the legislature within two weeks . 
California 's so-called Gann limit effectively prevents the state from spending new tax money and so drastically limits its options in an emergency . 
Both Mr. Brown , the state 's most influential legislator , and Gov. Deukmejian favor a temporary sales tax increase -- should more money be needed than the state can raise from existing sources and the federal government . 
According to a spokesman , the governor is also studying the possibility of raising state gasoline taxes . 
Mr. Brown , meanwhile , believes `` only one tax will be feasible , and it will be a one-penny sales tax increase , '' said Chuck Dalldorf , an aide . 
One immediate source of money is an emergency fund set up by Gov. Deukmejian . 
The fund has about $ 1 billion and is set up to handle `` precisely the kind of emergency '' the state faces , said Tom Beermann , the Governor 's deputy press secretary . 
But the fund 's size is disputed by Mr. Brown 's office , which estimates the fund holds from $ 630 million to $ 800 million . 
Moreover , an aide to Mr. Brown said Gov. Deukmejian `` has expressed a desire not to spend all the reserve on this . '' 
To push through a sales tax increase , however , the state will have to suspend the Gann limit , citing an emergency . 
And then it will be required to lower taxes by a corresponding amount during a three-year period after the temporary tax increase ends , said Cindy Katz , assistant director of the state department of finance . 
A sales tax increase would require two-thirds approval in both houses of the state 's legislature . 
But observers expect broad support . 
`` If there 's an emergency and there are n't sufficient funds from elsewhere , I think the attitude will be supportive , '' said Kirk West , president of the California Chamber of Commerce . 
But others think property owners ought to pay a higher portion of the state 's earthquake relief tab . 
Since the late 1970s , California property owners have benefited from a tax rollback as a result of a state ballot initiative known as Proposition 13 . 
The state could also increase gasoline taxes ; every one penny increase in the tax would yield $ 11 million a month . 
But Gov. Deukmejian and others are reluctant to do anything to harm the state 's chances of sharply raising gasoline taxes on a permanent basis . 
To raise more highway funds , a measure to double the state 's nine-cent a gallon tax over five years is set to appear on the state 's June election ballot . 
But some fear imposing a temporary gasoline tax increase in the meantime could undercut support among voters for the measure . 
Not everyone is convinced the state must raise new revenue to meet its earthquake needs . 
`` It 's possible , though not probable , '' that the state could get by with its existing resources and federal help , said Quentin Kopp , chairman of the state senate 's transportation committee . 
Separately , two men injured in last week 's earthquake-triggered freeway collapse in Oakland began a legal battle against the state over whether officials adequately heeded warnings about the structure 's safety . 
The claims , which were filed with the State Board of Control but will probably end up in court , are the first arising out of the collapse of the so-called Cypress structure viaduct . 
The men can defeat immunities that states often assert in court by showing that officials knew or should have known that design of the structure was defective and that they failed to make reasonable changes . 
A Board of Control spokesman said the board had not seen the claim and declined to comment . 
The following were among yesterday 's offerings and pricings in the U.S. and non-U.S. capital markets , with terms and syndicate manager , as compiled by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report : 
Exxon Capital Corp. -- $ 200 million of 8 1\/4 % notes due Nov. 1 , 1999 , priced at 99.60 to yield 8.31 % . 
The notes , which are noncallable , were priced at a spread of 45 basis points above the Treasury 's 10-year note . 
Rated triple-A by both Moody 's Investors Service Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corp. , the issue will be sold through Salomon Brothers Inc . 
Citicorp -- $ 200 million of 8 3\/4 % notes due Nov. 1 , 1996 , priced at 99.64 to yield 8.82 % . 
The noncallable issue was priced at a spread of 98 basis points above the Treasury 's seven-year note . 
Rated single-A-1 by Moody 's and double-A by S&P , the issue will be sold through Salomon Brothers . 
Boatmen 's Bancshares Inc. -- $ 150 million of 9 1\/4 % subordinated notes due Nov. 1 , 2001 , priced at 99.821 to yield 9.275 % . 
The noncallable issue was priced at a spread of 140 basis points above the Treasury 's 10-year note . 
Rated single-A-3 by Moody 's and single-A-minus by S&P , the issue will be sold through underwriters led by Morgan Stanley & Co . 
Xerox Corp. -- $ 150 million of 8 3\/4 % notes due Nov. 1 , 1995 , priced at 99.555 to yield 8.85 % . 
The noncallable issue was priced to yield 105 basis points above the Treasury 's fiveyear note . 
Rated single-A-2 by Moody 's and single-A-plus by S&P , the issue will be sold through underwriters led by Salomon Brothers . 
American General Finance Corp. -- $ 150 million of 8.45 % notes due Oct. 15 , 2009 , through Bear , Stearns & Co. , being offered at a price of 99.661 to yield 8.50 % . 
The noncallable issue , which has a one-time put Oct. 15 , 1999 , was priced at a spread of 66 basis points above the Treasury 's 10-year note . 
The issue is rated single-A-1 by Moody 's and single-A-plus by S&P . 
Baltimore Gas & Electric Co. -- $ 100 million of first and refunding mortgage bonds , due Oct. 15 , 1999 , through Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. , offered at par to yield 8.40 % . 
The noncallable issue is rated double-A-3 by Moody 's and double-A-minus by S&P . 
It was priced at a spread of 55 basis points above the Treasury 's 10-year note . 
Massachusetts -- $ 230 million of general obligation bonds , consolidated loan of 1989 , Series D , due 1990-2009 , through a Goldman , Sachs & Co. group . 
The insured bonds , rated triple-A by Moody 's and S&P , were priced to yield from 6.00 % in 1990 to 7.20 % in 2009 . 
Broward County School District , Fla. -- $ 185 million of school district general obligation bonds , Series 1989 , due 1991-1999 and 2008 , tentatively priced by a First Boston Corp. group to yield from 6.20 % in 1991 to 7.30 % in 2008 . 
There are $ 120.7 million of 7 1\/8 % term bonds due 2008 , priced to yield 7.30 % . 
Serial bonds are priced to yield to 7 % in 1999 . 
The bonds are rated single-A-1 by Moody 's and double-A-minus by S&P . 
Culver City Redevelopment Financing Authority , Calif. -- $ 145 million of revenue bonds , Series 1989 , tentatively priced by a Stone & Youngberg group . 
The issue includes $ 100 million of insured senior lien bonds . 
These consist of current interest bonds due 1990-2002 , 2010 and 2015 , and capital appreciation bonds due 2003 and 2004 , tentatively priced to yield from 5.75 % in 1990 to 7.14 % in 2010 . 
Bonds due 2003 , 2004 and 2015 are n't being formally reoffered . 
There are also $ 40 million of uninsured subordinate lien bonds , due Dec. 1 , 2008 , and Dec. 1 , 2015 . 
There are $ 15,015,000 of 7 1\/2 % bonds priced at par and due 2008 and $ 24,985,000 of 7.6 % bonds priced at par and due 2015 . 
The insured bonds are rated triple-A by Moody 's and S&P . 
The uninsured subordinate lien bonds are n't rated , according to the lead underwriter . 
West Virginia Parkways , Economic Development and Tourism Authority -- $ 143 million of parkway revenue bonds , Series 1989 , with current interest bonds due 1990-2002 and 2019 and capital appreciation bonds due 2003-2008 , tentatively priced by a PaineWebber Inc. group to yield from 6 % in 1990 to 7.31 % in 2019 . 
There are $ 86,525,000 of 7 1\/8 % bonds priced at 97 3\/4 to yield 7.31 % in 2019 . 
Current interest serial bonds are tentatively priced to yield to 7.05 % in 2002 . 
Capital appreciation bonds are priced to yield to maturity from 7.10 % in 2003 to 7.25 % in 2007 and 2008 . 
The bonds are insured and rated triple-A by Moody 's and S&P . 
Connecticut Housing Finance Authority -- $ 132.8 million of housing mortgage revenue bonds priced by a PaineWebber Inc. group . 
The $ 82.8 million of Series B bonds , which are n't subject to the alternative minimum tax , were priced at par to yield from 6.85 % in 2000 to 7.20 % in 2009 . 
Meanwhile , the $ 50 million of Series C bonds , which are suject to the alternative minimum tax , were priced at par to yield from 6.25 % in 1990 to 7.10 % to 2000 . 
The issue is expected to receive a double-A rating from Moody 's , the underwriter said . 
An S&P rating of double-A-plus has already been confirmed . 
Montgomery County , Md. -- $ 75 million of general obligation , Series B , consolidated public improvement bonds of 1989 , through a Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. group . 
The bonds , rated triple-A by Moody 's and S&P , were priced to yield from 5.75 % in 1990 to 6.90 % in 2006 to 2009 . 
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. -- $ 500 million of Remic mortgage securities being offered by Prudential-Bache Capital Funding Inc . 
There were no details available on the pricing of the issue , Freddie Mac 's Series 108 . 
The issue is backed by Freddie Mac 8 1\/2 % securities . 
Hanwa Co . ( Japan ) -- Two-part , $ 800 million issue of bonds due Nov. 9 , 1994 , with equity-purchase warrants , indicating a 4 3\/8 % coupon at par . 
European portion of $ 700 million via Yamaichi International Europe Ltd . 
Asian portion of $ 100 million via Yamatane Securities Europe Ltd . 
Each $ 5,000 bond carries one warrant , exercisable from Nov. 28 , 1989 , through Oct. 26 , 1994 , to buy shares at an expected premium of 2 1\/2 % to the closing share price when terms are fixed Oct. 26 . 
Japan Storage Battery Co. -- $ 100 million of bonds due Nov. 9 , 1993 , with equity-purchase warrants , indicating a 3 7\/8 % coupon at par via Nikko Securities Co . ( Europe ) Ltd . 
Guaranteed by Mitsubishi Bank Ltd . 
Each $ 5,000 bond carries one warrant , exercisable from Nov. 27 , 1989 , through Oct. 26 , 1993 , to buy shares at an expected premium of 2 1\/2 % to the closing share price when terms are fixed Nov. 1 . 
Sanraku Inc . ( Japan ) -- $ 100 million of bonds due Nov. 9 , 1993 , with equity-purchase warrants , indicating a 3 7\/8 % coupon at par , via Nomura International . 
Guaranteed by Dai-Ichi Kangyo Bank Ltd . 
Each $ 5,000 bond carries one warrant , exercisable from Nov. 21 , 1989 , through Oct. 19 , 1993 , to buy shares at an expected premium of 2 1\/2 % to the closing share price when terms are fixed Oct. 31 . 
Nippon Signal Co . ( Japan ) -- 80 million marks of bonds with equity-purchase warrants , indicating a 1 1\/2 % coupon , due Nov. 9 , 1994 , and priced at par , via Commerzbank . 
Guaranteed by Fuji Bank . 
Each 5,000 mark bond carries one warrant and one certificate for four warrants , exercisable from Dec. 18 , 1989 , to Oct. 26 , 1994 , to buy shares at an expected premium of 2 1\/2 % above the closing share price when prices are fixed Oct. 30 . 
Miyoshi Oil & Fat Co . ( Japan ) -- 120 million Swiss francs of privately placed convertible notes due Dec. 31 , 1993 , with a fixed 0.25 % coupon at par , via Union Bank of Switzerland . 
Put option on Dec. 31 , 1991 , at a fixed 107 to yield 3.43 % . 
Each 50,000 Swiss franc bond convertible from Nov. 28 , 1989 , to Dec. 20 , 1993 , at a 5 % premium over closing share price Oct. 30 , when terms are scheduled to be fixed . 
Fokker N.V . ( Netherlands ) -- 150 million Swiss francs of convertible bonds due Nov. 15 , 1997 , with a fixed 4 % coupon at par via Union Bank of Switzerland . 
Each 5,000 Swiss franc bond convertible from Jan. 3 , 1989 , to Oct. 31 , 1997 . 
Fees 2 1\/8 . 
Sapporo Lion Ltd . ( Japan ) -- 50 million Swiss francs of privately placed convertible notes due Dec. 31 , 1994 , with a 0.25 % coupon at par , via Yamaichi Bank ( Switzerland ) . 
Put option on Dec. 31 , 1991 , at an indicated 107 7\/8 to yield 3.84 % . 
Each 50,000 Swiss franc note convertible from Dec. 1 , 1989 , to Dec. 16 , 1994 , at 5 % premium over the closing share price Oct. 26 , when terms are scheduled to be fixed . 
Credit Local de France -- 100 million Swiss francs of 6 % , privately placed notes due Dec. 1 , 1996 , priced at 100 1\/2 to yield 5.91 % , via Swiss Bank Corp . 
People start their own businesses for many reasons . 
But a chance to fill out sales-tax records is rarely one of them . 
Red tape is the bugaboo of small business . 
Ironically , the person who wants to run his or her own business is probably the active , results-oriented sort most likely to hate meeting the rules and record-keeping demands of federal , state and local regulators . 
Yet every business owner has to face the mound of forms and regulations -- and often is the only one available to tackle it . 
There is hope of change . 
Last week , Sen. Malcolm Wallop ( R. , Wyo . ) held hearings on a bill to strengthen an existing law designed to reduce regulatory hassles for small businesses . 
`` A great many federal regulations are meant for larger entities and do n't really apply to small businesses , '' says Marian Jacob , a legislative aide to Sen. Wallop . 
Other lawmakers are busy trying to revive the recently lapsed Paperwork Reduction Act , which many feel benefited small enterprises . 
Thus , optimistic entrepreneurs await a promised land of less red tape -- just as soon as Uncle Sam gets around to arranging it . 
Meanwhile , they tackle the mounds of paper -- and fantasize about a dream world where bulk-mail postal regulations and government inspectors are banished . 
To find out what red tape riles entrepreneurs most , the Journal asked a completely unscientific , random sample of business owners to fantasize about the forms and regulations they would most like to get lost in the mail . 
Some entrepreneurs say the red tape they most love to hate is red tape they would also hate to lose . 
They concede that much of the government meddling that torments them is essential to the public good , and even to their own businesses . 
Rules that set standards for products or govern business behavior , generally the best regarded form of red tape , `` create a level playing field and keep unscrupulous competitors away , '' says Sidney West , president of TechDesign International Inc. , a Springfield , Va. , business that designs telecommunication and other products . 
Mr. West cites the Federal Communications Commission and its standards for telecommunications equipment : `` They monitor product quality and prevent junk from flooding the market . '' 
Some gripes about red tape are predictable : Architects complain about a host of building regulations , auto leasing companies about car insurance rules . 
Determining when handicapped access is required can be a nightmare for architects , says Mark Dooling , president of Dooling & Co. , a Newton , Mass. , architectural firm . 
There is such a maze of federal , state and local codes that `` building inspectors are backing away from interpreting them , '' Mr. Dooling says . 
Taxi , leasing and other companies that maintain fleets of vehicles devote substantial resources to complying with state insurance laws and a host of agencies . 
`` It 's very costly and time-consuming , '' says Phil Rosen , a partner in Fleet & Leasing Management Inc. , a Boston car-leasing company . 
One senior executive at his firm spends nearly 20 % of his time on insurance , he says . 
Other forms of red tape are more pervasive . 
The most onerous , many entrepreneurs say , is the record-keeping and filing required by tax authorities . 
Complying with environmental and workplace regulations runs a close second . 
But gripes run the gamut . 
Here is the red tape that irks surveyed business owners the most : 
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS : 
Next to medical insurance , `` costs of compliance '' are the fastest-growing expense at Impco Inc. , a Providence , R.I. , chemical company . 
Peter Gebhard , the company 's owner , says spending on regulatory paper work and the people to do it -- mostly to comply with federal , state and local environmental laws -- will rise almost 30 % this year to $ 100,000 . 
Mr. Gebhard adds that spending on environmental red tape amounts to between 6.5 % and 7.5 % of Impco 's total operating expenses . 
Eastern Reproduction Corp. , a Waltham , Mass. , maker of thin metal precision parts , must report to five federal and state agencies as well as to local fire , police , hospital and plumbing authorities , says Robert Maguire , president . 
One state environmental regulator returned a report because `` it was n't heavy enough , it could n't have been correct , '' Mr. Maguire says . 
WITHHOLDING RULES : 
Employers must deposit withholding taxes exceeding $ 3,000 within three days after payroll -- or pay stiff penalties -- and that 's a big problem for small businesses . 
It 's especially nettlesome `` if you 're on the road and you 're the one responsible , '' says Eddie Brown , president of Brown Capital Management Inc. , a Baltimore money-management firm . 
EMPLOYEE MANUALS : 
Revising employee manuals on pensions , health care and other subjects costs over $ 25,000 a year for Bert Giguiere , president of Professional Agricultural Management Inc. , a Fresno , Calif. , provider of business services to farmers . 
An employer leaves itself open to a great deal of liability if its employee manuals do n't reflect the most recent laws , he says . 
But the ever-changing laws are usually so complicated and confusing that `` you need professionals to help you ; you ca n't do it yourself , '' he adds . 
PENSION AND PROFIT-SHARING RULES : 
Complying with these is enough to make business owners look forward to their own pension days . 
Yearly changes in federal benefit laws force small businesses to repeatedly re-evaluate and redesign existing plans . 
Alice Fixx , who runs her own public-relations concern in New York , says she has had to overhaul her pension and profit-sharing plans three times in the past three years . 
`` It does n't increase benefits , but it 's costly and time-consuming , '' Ms. Fixx says . 
Compliance added 15 % to 20 % to her accounting bill last year , she says . 
SALES TAX RECORDS : 
Advertising agencies and other service companies are exempt from city and state sales tax in most locales -- but the exemption comes at a price of exhaustive records and rigorous reviews . 
To justify their exempt status and avoid penalties , these businesses must show once a year that each and every transaction on which they did n't pay sales tax was a legitimate business expense . 
`` You need one person to just take care of sales tax , '' says Jennie Tong , executive vice president of Lee Liu & Tong Advertising Inc. , New York . 
When the Trinity Repertory Theater named Anne Bogart its artistic director last spring , the nation 's theatrical cognoscenti arched a collective eyebrow . 
Ms. Bogart , an acclaimed creator of deconstructed dramatic collages that tear into such sacred texts as Rodgers and Hammerstein 's `` South Pacific , '' is decidedly downtown . 
Trinity Rep meanwhile is one of the nation 's oldest and most respected regional theaters , still hosting an annual `` A Christmas Carol . '' 
How would this bastion of traditional values fare in Ms. Bogart 's iconoclastic hands ? 
She held her fire with her first production at the Trinity earlier this season . 
It was a predictable revival of her prize-winning off-Broadway anthology of Bertolt Brecht 's theoretical writings , called `` No Plays , No Poetry . '' 
Now , with the opening of Maxim Gorky 's bourgeois-bashing `` Summerfolk , '' Ms. Bogart has laid her cards on the table . 
Hers is a hand that will test the mettle of her audiences . 
For Ms. Bogart , who initially studied and directed in Germany ( and cites such European directors as Peter Stein , Giorgio Strehler and Ariane Mnouchkine as influences ) tends to stage her productions with a Brechtian rigor -- whether the text demands it or not . 
And Gorky , considered the father of Soviet socialist realism , did not write plays that easily lend themselves to deliberately antirealistic distancing techniques . 
Gorky was a loyal if occasionally ambivalent proletarian writer committed to enlightening the masses with plain speaking rooted in a slightly sour version of Chekhovian humanism . 
And `` Summerfolk , '' penned in 1904 as a kind of sequel to Chekhov 's `` Cherry Orchard , '' is a lawn party of Russian yuppies engaged in an exhausting ideological fight to the finish between the allrightniks and the reformers . 
Along the way there also are lots of romantic dalliances . 
Wisely Ms. Bogart has kept Gorky 's time and place intact . 
Despite the absence of samovars ( and a tendency to turn the furniture upside down ) , the production is rich in Russian ennui voiced by languorous folk sporting beige linen and rumpled cotton , with boaters and fishing poles aplenty . 
But beyond this decorative nod to tradition , Ms. Bogart and company head off in a stylistic direction that all but transforms Gorky 's naturalistic drama into something akin to , well , farce . 
The director 's attempt to force some Brechtian distance between her actors and their characters frequently backfires with performances that are unduly mannered . 
Not only do the actors stand outside their characters and make it clear they are at odds with them , but they often literally stand on their heads . 
Like Peter Sellars , Ms. Bogart manipulates her actors as if they were rag dolls , sprawling them on staircases , dangling them off tables , even hanging them from precipices while having them perform some gymnastic feats of derring-do . 
There are moments in this `` Summerfolk '' when the characters populating the vast multilevel country house ( which looks like a parody of Frank Lloyd Wright and is designed by Victoria Petrovich ) spout philosophic bon mots with the self-conscious rat-a-tat-tat pacing of `` Laugh In . '' 
`` Talk hurts from where it spurts , '' one of them says . 
The clash of ideologies survives this treatment , but the nuance and richness of Gorky 's individual characters have vanished in the scuffle . 
As for the humor that Gorky 's text provides , when repainted in such broad strokes ( particularly by the lesser members of the ensemble ) it looks and sounds forced . 
Ms. Bogart does better with music than with words when she wants , as she so often does want , to express herself through Gorky 's helpless play . 
Here she has the aid of her longtime associate Jeff Helpern , whom she appointed Trinity 's first-ever musical director and whom she equipped with a spanking new $ 60,000 sound system and recording studio . 
For Gorky , Mr. Helpern provided an aural collage of Debussy and Rachmaninoff , which is less a score than a separate character with a distinct point of view . 
Like Brecht , and indeed Ezra Pound , Ms. Bogart has said that her intent in such manipulative staging of the classics is simply an attempt to `` make it new . '' 
Indeed , during a recent post-production audience discussion , the director explained that her fondest artistic wish was to find a way to play `` Somewhere Over the Rainbow '' so that the song 's `` original beauty comes through , '' surmounting the cliche . 
The danger that Ms. Bogart seems to be courting here is one of obfuscation rather than rejuvenation , a vision so at odds with the playwright 's that the two points of view nullify , rather than illuminate , each other . 
Ms. Bogart 's cast is part and parcel of the problem . 
Ed Shea and Barbara Orson never find a real reason for their love affair as the foolish , idealistic young Vass and the tirelessly humanitarian doctor Maria Lvovna . 
Cynthia Strickland as the long-suffering Varvara is a tiresome whiner , not the inspirational counterrevolutionary Gorky intended . 
Better to look in the corners for performances that inspire or amuse . 
Janice Duclos , in addition to possessing one of the evening 's more impressive vocal instruments , brings an unsuspected comedic touch to her role of Olga , everybody 's favorite mom . 
Marni Rice plays the maid with so much edge as to steal her two scenes . 
But it is the Trinity Rep newcomer , Jonathan Fried ( Zamislov , the paralegal ) who is the actor to watch , whether he is hamming it up while conducting the chamber musicians or seducing his neighbor 's wife ( Becca Lish ) by licking her bosom . 
Ms. de Vries writes frequently about theater . 
( During its centennial year , The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history . ) 
MORGAN STANLEY , THE ONCE STODGY investment house , in 1974 helped a corporate client complete a hostile takeover . 
It was the start of a boom in unfriendly , even ungentlemanly , mergers . 
On July 18 , 1974 , International Nickle of Canada -- advised by Morgan -- offered $ 28 a share , equal to $ 157 million , for ESB , a Philadelphia battery maker . 
ESB said it was given only a three-hour advance warning on a `` take it or leave it '' basis from Inco , as the Toronto company is called . 
`` ESB is aware that a hostile tender offer is being made by a foreign company for all of ESB 's shares , '' said F.J. Port , ESB 's president . 
`` Hostile '' thus entered the merger-acquisition lexicon . 
Joseph Flom , of Skadden , Arps , Slote , Meagher & Flom , which became a leading legal firm in merger cases , said the case `` made takeovers respectable . '' 
ESB spurned Inco and within five days ESB had a `` white knight '' as United Aircraft -- headed by Harry Gray , a shrewdly friendly acquirer of companies -- offered $ 34 a share . 
Gray was advised by Goldman Sachs and Merrill Lynch . 
ESB directors warmly accepted , but a whirlwind bidding match ensued . 
Within a few days in July , Inco raised its bid to $ 36 and United matched it . 
On a single day Inco lifted its offer to $ 38 and then to $ 41 , equal to $ 225.5 million . 
United met the $ 38 but then withdrew . 
ESB on July 29 accepted the Inco offer and the brief battle -- unlike the intricate and lengthy big takeovers of 1984-1989 -- was over . 
The new gritty game became a money maker for Wall Street 's once austere old-name houses . 
Inco paid Morgan an advisory fee of about $ 250,000 , a paltry figure by today 's measures . 
Early this year Morgan and three other investment houses each received $ 25 million in advisory fees from Kohlberg Kravis & Roberts in its $ 25 billion friendly buy-out of RJR Nabisco . 
HomeFed Corp. said third-quarter net income slid 14 % to $ 23.9 million , or $ 1.10 per fully diluted share , from $ 27.9 million , or $ 1.21 a fully diluted share , because of increased bad assets and unexpected trouble in unloading foreclosed property . 
The decline surprised analysts and jolted HomeFed 's stock , which lost 8.6 % of its value , closing at $ 38.50 on the New York Stock Exchange , down $ 3.625 . 
HomeFed had been one of the handful of large West Coast thrifts that in recent quarters had counteracted interest-rate problems dogging the industry by keeping a lid on problem assets and lending heavily into the furious California housing market . 
Analysts had been projecting fully diluted earnings in the third quarter in the range of about $ 1.30 a share . 
However , HomeFed 's loan originations and purchases plunged 26 % in the quarter , to $ 1.4 billion from $ 1.9 billion a year earlier . 
Meanwhile , non-performing assets rose to $ 593 million from $ 518.7 million . 
Some $ 380 million of the troubled assets is repossessed real estate , a 55.6 % surge from the $ 244.2 million of repossesed property HomeFed held a year ago . 
HomeFed has $ 17.9 billion of assets . 
HomeFed said most of the troubled assets are apartment complexes , shopping malls and other commercial real estate . 
It said about half are in California , with the rest scattered across the country . 
It said sales of such properties were slower than anticipated in the third quarter , but it expects sales to pick up in the rest of the year . 
HomeFed said the slide in loan originations was more a matter of design than a sign of cooling in the California market . 
Any such downturn in California would be grim news for West Coast thrifts , particularly the less healthy ones , which have performed poorly even with a torrid market . 
But HomeFed said it purposely curbed loan originations in the quarter because of uncertainty over the new capital requirements and regulations that will emerge from negotiations over implementing the government 's massive thrift bailout bill . 
It said its real-estate operations earned a record $ 21.7 million , more than double year-earlier real estate profit of $ 9 million . 
And analysts said they see no signs of an imminent swoon in California real estate , even with last week 's earthquake . 
The thrift said earnings also were nicked in the quarter by a $ 4 million provision for losses associated with its previously reported plan to liquidate a real-estate franchise network . 
For the nine months , HomeFed earned $ 82.5 million , or $ 3.52 a fully diluted share , a 4.3 % increase from year-earlier net income of $ 79.1 million , or $ 3.43 a fully diluted share . 
Yields on certificates of deposit at major banks were little changed in the latest week . 
The average yield on six-month CDs of $ 50,000 and less slipped to 7.96 % from 8.00 % , according to Banxquote Money Markets , an information service based here . 
On one-year CDs of $ 50,000 and less , the average slid to 8.02 % from 8.06 % . 
Both issues are among the most popular with individual investors . 
`` Because of shrinkage in the economy , rates can be expected to decline over a one-year horizon , '' said Norberto Mehl , chairman of Banxquote . 
`` It 's unclear how much rates can fall and how soon . '' 
Changes in CD yields in the week ended Tuesday were in line with blips up and down within a fairly narrow range for the last two months . 
Interest rates generally began declining last spring after moving steadily upward for more than a year . 
The average yield on small-denomination three-month CDs moved up two-hundredths of a percentage point in the latest week to 7.85 % . 
Long-term CDs declined just a fraction . 
The average yield on both two-year CDs and five-year CDs was 7.98 % . 
Only CDs sold by major brokerage firms posted significant increases in average yields in the latest week , reflecting increased yields on Treasury bills sold at Monday 's auction . 
The average yield on six-month broker-sold CDs rose to 8.29 % from 8.05 % and on one-year CDs the average yield rose to 8.30 % from 8.09 % . 
The brokerage firms , which negotiate rates with the banks and thrifts whose CDs they sell , generally feel they have to offer clients more than they can get on T-bills or from banks and thrifts directly . 
T-bills sold at Monday 's auction yielded 7.90 % for six months and 7.77 % for three months , up from 7.82 % and 7.61 % , respectively , the week before . 
So-called jumbo CDs , typically in denominations of $ 90,000 and up , also usually follow T-bills and interest rate trends in general more than those aimed at small investors . 
Some jumbos posted fractional changes in average yields this week , both up and down . 
The average yield on threemonth jumbos rose to 8.00 % from 7.96 % , while the two-year average fell by the same amount to 7.89 % . 
Six-month and oneyear yields were unchanged , on average . 
`` The ( CD ) market is unsettled right now , '' said Banxquote 's Mr. Mehl . 
`` It 's very easily influenced by changes in the stock market and the junk bond market . '' 
The small changes in averages reflect generally unchanged yields at many major banks . 
Some , however , lowered yields significantly . 
At Chase Manhattan Bank in New York , for example , the yield on a small denomination six-month CD fell about a quarter of a percentage point to 8.06 % . 
In California , Bank of America dropped the yield on both six-month and one-year `` savings '' CDs to 8.33 % from 8.61 % . 
Yields on money-market deposits were unchanged at an average 6.96 % for $ 50,000 and less and down just a hundredth of a percentage point to 7.41 % for jumbo deposits . 
Lion Nathan Ltd. agreed to buy the franchise to bottle , distribute and market Pepsi-Cola soft-drink products in Australia , the company said . 
The New Zealand brewing and retail concern did n't disclose terms . 
The agreement is effective Jan. 1 and is subject to approval from Australia 's Foreign Investment Review Board . 
Cadbury Schweppes Australia Ltd. has held the Australian Pepsi franchise for the past four years . 
Lion Nathan and PepsiCola Australia , a unit of PepsiCo Inc. of the U.S. , did n't say why Cadbury Schweppes will no longer hold the franchise . 
Wang Laboratories Inc. has sold $ 25 million of assets and reached agreements in principle to sell an additional $ 187 million shortly , Richard Miller , president , said at the annual meeting . 
He said Wang had reached an agreement with a `` major financial firm '' to sell for $ 150 million its domestic equipment lease portfolio and that of its Wang Credit Corp. subsidiary . 
He said it also agreed to sell a portion of its European real estate unit for $ 37 million . 
Mr. Miller said that Wang has already sold some $ 12 million of miscellaneous assets and disclosed that it had received $ 13 million from Compaq Computer Corp. , Houston , in the previously announced sale of its Stirling , Scotland , plant . 
Mr. Miller repeated that in the next six months he plans to sell another $ 200 million to $ 300 million of assets to repay debt and reduce interest costs at Wang , a minincomputer maker in Lowell , Mass . 
In response to questions after the annual meeting , Mr. Miller said the company is no longer looking for an equity investor . 
During the summer , Wang executives had said they might seek outside investment . 
Murata Mfg. Co. said it is establishing a subsidiary in Britain to produce electric parts , including ceramic condensers . 
The Tokyo maker of ceramic capacitors said it purchased a plant in Plymouth . 
The company did n't disclose a purchase price or capitalization figures . 
Murata said , however , it will invest about 1.4 billion yen ( $ 9.9 million ) in the new company . 
Production is slated to begin in April . 
The company , which has a European foothold , Murata Europe Management G.m.b . H. in Germany , said the latest venture is designed to meet demand for electric parts in European Community countries ahead of the creation of the unified market by the end of 1992 . 
Murata expects sales at the unit of about 1.5 billion yen in the first year . 
Safeway Stores Inc. reported a 69 % decline in profit for the fiscal third quarter , but said operating improvements were masked by unusual gains in the year-earlier period . 
The Oakland grocery retailer , closely held since a $ 4.2 billion leveraged buy-out in 1986 , said profit for the three months ended Sept. 9 was $ 7.1 million , compared with $ 23 million a year earlier . 
But it said the year-earlier results included gains of $ 23.5 million from divestitures . 
Sales rose 4.2 % to $ 3.31 billion from $ 3.2 billion . 
For the nine months , the company said profit fell 49 % to $ 23.5 million from $ 46 million in the year-earlier quarter , which included divestiture-related gains of $ 50.6 million . 
Sales increased 5.5 % to $ 9.81 billion from $ 9.3 billion . 
Benjamin Jacobson & Sons has been the New York Stock Exchange specialist firm in charge of trading stock in UAL Corp. and its predecessors since the early 1930s . 
But the firm has never had a day like yesterday . 
At first UAL did n't open because of an order imbalance . 
When it did a half-hour into the session , it was priced at $ 150 a share , down more than $ 28 from Monday 's close . 
It sank further to as low as $ 145 , but a big rally developed in the last half hour , pushing the stock back up to close at $ 170 , down just $ 8.375 from Monday . 
In the process , 4.9 million shares traded , making UAL the second most active issue on the Big Board . 
Munching pizza when they could and yelling until their voices gave out , the two Benjamin Jacobson specialists at the Big Board 's UAL trading post yesterday presided over what can only be described as a financial free-for-all . 
`` It was chaotic . 
But we like to call it ` controlled chaos , ' '' said 47-year-old Robert J. Jacobson Jr. , grandson of the firm 's founder . 
He manned the UAL post yesterday with Christopher Bates , 33 , an energetic Long Islander who 's a dead ringer for actor Nicolas Cage . 
Who was doing all the selling ? 
`` Options traders , arbitrage traders -- everyone , '' said Mr. Bates , cooling down with a carton of apple juice after the close yesterday . 
Added Mr. Jacobson , `` There were some pretty bad losses in the stock . '' 
Big Board traders said a 200,000-share buy order at $ 150 a share entered by Bear , Stearns & Co. , which was active in UAL stock all day , is what set off the UAL crowd in the late afternoon . 
A subsequent rally in UAL helped the staggering stock market stage an astonishing recovery from an 80-point deficit to finish only slightly below Monday 's close . 
Both Jacobson traders , who had been hoping UAL trading would get back to normal , read the news about the unraveling of UAL takeover plans on the train into work yesterday morning . 
The news told them it would be a while longer before UAL resumed trading like a regular airline stock after months of gyrations . 
When Mr. Jacobson walked into the office at 7:30 a.m. EDT , he announced : `` OK , buckle up . '' 
Messrs. Jacobson and Bates walked on the Big Board floor at about 8:45 a.m. yesterday and immediately spotted trouble . 
Already entered in the Big Board 's computers and transmitted to their post were sell orders for 65,000 UAL shares . 
The UAL news had already caused a selling furor in the so-called third market , in which firms buy and sell stock away from the exchange floor . 
UAL , which closed on the Big Board Monday at $ 178.375 a share , traded in the third market afterward as low as $ 158 a share . 
There were rumors of $ 148-a-share trades . 
In the 45 minutes before the 9:30 opening bell , the Jacobson specialists kept getting sell orders , heavier than they imagined . 
And at 9:15 , they posted a $ 135 to $ 155 `` first indication , '' or the price range in which the stock would probably open . 
That range was quickly narrowed to $ 145 to $ 155 , although traders surrounding the post were told that $ 148 to $ 150 would be the likely target . 
When UAL finally opened a half hour late , some 400,000 shares traded at $ 150 . 
There was `` selling pressure from everyone , '' said one trader . 
This month 's Friday-the-13th market plunge spurred by UAL news was n't as bad for the Jacobson specialists as yesterday 's action . 
On that earlier day , the stock 's trading was halted at a critical time so the specialists could catch their breath . 
Not yesterday . 
Mr. Jacobson , his gray hair flying , did n't wear out his red-white-and-blue sneakers , but he sweat so much he considered sending out for a new shirt . 
Mr. Bates usually handles day-to-day UAL trading on his own . 
But yesterday , the heavy trading action eventually consumed not only Messrs. Jacobson and Bates but four other Jacobson partners , all doing their specialist-firm job of tugging buyers and sellers together and adjusting prices to accommodate the market . 
About 30 floor traders crammed near the UAL post most of the day , and probably hundreds more came and went -- a `` seething mass , '' as one trader described it . 
The 4.9 million-share volume flowing through the Jacobson specialist operation was about five times normal for the stock . 
The heavy buying in the last half hour led the specialists to take special steps . 
The Bear Stearns order that marked the late-day turnaround caused a `` massive buying effort '' as UAL jumped $ 20 a share to $ 170 in the last half hour , said Mr. Bates . 
With 15 seconds of trading to go , Mr. Jacobson , with what voice he had left , announced to the trading mob : `` We 're going to trade one price on the bell . '' 
That meant no trading would occur in the final seconds , as a way of making sure that last-second orders are n't subjected to a sudden price swing that would upset customers . 
About 11,000 shares sold at $ 170 on the bell , representing about eight to 10 late orders , the specialists estimate . 
Big Board traders praised the Jacobson specialists for getting through yesterday without a trading halt . 
In Chicago , a UAL spokesman , `` by way of policy , '' declined to comment on the company 's stock or the specialists ' performance . 
Leaving the exchange at about 5 p.m. , the Jacobson specialists made no predictions about how trading might go today . 
Said Earl Ellis , a Jacobson partner who got involved in the UAL action , `` It all starts all over again '' today . 
Britain 's current account deficit dropped to # 1.6 billion ( $ 2.56 billion ) in September from an adjusted # 2 billion ( $ 3.21 billion ) the previous month , but the improvement comes amid increasing concern that a recession could strike the U.K. economy next year . 
The Confederation of British Industry 's latest survey shows that business executives expect a pronounced slowdown , largely because of a 16-month series of interest-rate increases that has raised banks ' base lending rates to 15 % . 
`` The outlook has deteriorated since the summer , with orders and employment falling and output at a standstill , '' said David Wigglesworth , chairman of the industry group 's economic committee . 
He also said investment by businesses is falling off . 
Of 1,224 companies surveyed , 31 % expect to cut spending on plant equipment and machinery , while only 28 % plan to spend more . 
But despite mounting recession fears , government data do n't yet show the economy grinding to a halt . 
Unemployment , for example , has continued to decline , and the September trade figures showed increases in both imports and exports . 
As a result , Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher 's government is n't currently expected to ease interest rates before next spring , if then . 
Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson views the high rates as his chief weapon against inflation , which was ignited by tax cuts and loose credit policies in 1986 and 1987 . 
Officials fear that any loosening this year could rekindle inflation or further weaken the pound against other major currencies . 
Fending off attacks on his economic policies in a House of Commons debate yesterday , Mr. Lawson said inflation `` remains the greatest threat to our economic well-being '' and promised to take `` whatever steps are needed '' to choke it off . 
The latest government figures said retail prices in September were up 7.6 % from a year earlier . 
Many economists have started predicting a mild recession next year . 
David Owen , U.K. economist with Kleinwort Benson Group , reduced his growth forecast for 1990 to 0.7 % from 1.2 % and termed the risk of recession next year `` quite high . '' 
But he said the downturn probably wo n't become a `` major contraction '' similar to those of 1974 and 1982 . 
Still , Britain 's current slump is a cause for concern here as the nation joins in the European Community 's plan to create a unified market by 1992 . 
Compared with the major economies on the Continent , the U.K. faces both higher inflation and lower growth in the next several months . 
As a result , Mr. Owen warned , investment will be more likely to flow toward the other European economies and `` the U.K. will be less prepared for the single market . '' 
Britain 's latest trade figures contained some positive news for the economy , such as a surge in the volume of exports , which were 8.5 % higher than a year earlier . 
But while September exports rose to # 8.43 billion , imports shot up to # 10.37 billion . 
The resulting # 1.9 billion merchandise trade deficit was partly offset by an assumed surplus of # 300 million in so-called invisible items , which include income from investments , services and official transfers . 
Despite the narrowing of the monthly trade gap , economists expect the current account deficit for all of 1989 to swell to about # 20 billion from # 14.6 billion in 1988 . 
Increasingly , economists say the big deficit reflects the slipping competitive position of British industry . 
`` When the country gets wealthier , we tend to buy high-quality imports , '' Mr. Owen said . 
Vickers PLC , a British aerospace , defense and automotive conglomerate , said it reached an agreed cash bid of # 108.2 million ( $ 173.3 million ) for Ross Catherall Group PLC , a maker of specialty alloy and ceramics . 
The company said it expects to receive acceptances for its offer of 253 pence ( $ 4.05 ) per share representing at least 67 % of Ross Catherall 's issued share capital , or 12.7 million ordinary shares . 
Vickers said its offer also includes an option to receive a redeemable loan note in lieu of cash . 
The notes can be redeemed starting in July 1991 . 
The company said its acquisition of Ross Catherall will be covered largely by cash raised in its July disposal of Howson-Algraphy for # 241.7 million . 
If bluebloods wo n't pay high prices for racehorses anymore , who will ? 
Breeders are betting on the common folk . 
The Thoroughbred Owners and Breeders Association , a Lexington , Ky.-based trade group , has launched `` seminars '' for `` potential investors '' at race tracks around the country . 
The group , which has held half a dozen seminars so far , also is considering promotional videos and perhaps a pitch to Wall Street investment bankers . 
`` People in this business have been insulated , '' says Josh Pons , a horse breeder from Bel Air , Md . 
`` But the real future of this game is in a number of people owning a few horses . '' 
At the Laurel race track , the breeders are romancing people like Tim Hulings , a beer packaging plant worker . 
Right now , Mr. Hulings is waving his racing program , cheering for Karnak on the Nile , a sleek thoroughbred galloping down the home stretch . 
Mr. Hulings gloats that he sold all his stocks a week before the market plummeted 190 points on Oct. 13 , and he is using the money to help buy a 45-acre horse farm . 
`` Just imagine how exciting that would be if that 's your horse , '' he says . 
But experts caution that this is n't a game for anyone with a weak stomach or wallet . 
`` It 's a big-risk business , '' warns Charles C. Mihalek , a Lexington attorney and former Kentucky state securities commissioner . 
`` You have to go into it firmly believing that it 's the kind of investment where you can lose everything . '' 
And many have done just that . 
Consider Spendthrift Farm , a prominent Lexington horse farm that went public in 1983 but hit hard times and filed for bankruptcy-court protection last year . 
A group of investors recently bought the remaining assets of Spendthrift , hoping to rebuild it . 
Other investors have lost millions in partnerships that bought thoroughbred racehorses or stallion breeding rights . 
One big problem has been the thoroughbred racehorse market . 
From 1974 to 1984 , prices for the best yearlings at the summer sales rose 918 % to an average of $ 544,681 . 
Since then , prices have slumped , to an average of $ 395,374 this summer . 
But that 's for the best horses , with most selling for much less -- as little as $ 100 for some pedestrian thoroughbreds . 
Even while they move outside their traditional tony circle , racehorse owners still try to capitalize on the elan of the sport . 
Glossy brochures circulated at racetracks gush about the limelight of the winner 's circle and high-society schmoozing . 
One handout promises : `` Pedigrees , parties , post times , parimutuels and pageantry . '' 
`` It 's just a matter of marketing and promoting ourselves , '' says Headley Bell , a fifth-generation horse breeder from Lexington . 
Maybe it 's not that simple . 
For starters , racehorse buyers have to remember the basic problem of such ventures : These beasts do n't come with warranties . 
And for every champion , there are plenty of nags . 
Katherine Voss , a veteran trainer at the Laurel , Md. , track , offers neophytes a sobering tour of a horse barn , noting that only three of about a dozen horses have won sizable purses . 
One brown two-year-old filly was wheezing from a cold , while another had splints on its legs , keeping both animals from the racetrack . 
`` You can see the highs and lows of the business all under one roof , '' she tells the group . 
`` There are n't too many winners . '' 
Perhaps the biggest hurdle owners face is convincing newcomers that this is a reputable business . 
Some badly managed partnerships have burned investors , sometimes after they received advice from industry `` consultants . '' 
So owners have developed a `` code of ethics , '' outlining rules for consultants and agents , and disclosure of fees and any conflicts of interest . 
But some are skeptical of the code 's effectiveness . 
`` The industry is based on individual honesty , '' says Cap Hershey , a Lexington horse farmer and one of the investors who bought Spendthrift . 
Despite the drop in prices for thoroughbreds , owning one still is n't cheap . 
At the low end , investors can spend $ 15,000 or more to own a racehorse in partnership with others . 
At a yearling sale , a buyer can go solo and get a horse for a few thousand dollars . 
But that means paying the horse 's maintenance ; on average , it costs $ 25,000 a year to raise a horse . 
For those looking for something between a minority stake and total ownership , the owners ' group is considering a special sale where established horse breeders would sell a 50 % stake in horses to newcomers . 
BUELL INDUSTRIES Inc. halved its quarterly dividend to five cents a share , payable Nov. 17 to stock of record Nov. 3 . 
The company 's quarterly dividend had been 10 cents a share since April 30 , 1988 . 
Buell recently said it would incur an aftertax charge of about $ 3.6 million in its fourth quarter ending Tuesday , in connection with the sale and discontinuance of several lines at a plant . 
The Waterbury , Conn. , maker of industrial fasteners and metal stampings has 2.3 million shares outstanding . 
Dunkin ' Donuts Inc. , battling a takeover proposal by Canada 's DD Acquisition Corp. , said that its directors will evaluate takeover offers submitted by Nov. 10 . 
Dunkin ' Donuts , based in Randolph , Mass. , previously said it would explore `` alternatives , '' including a leveraged buy-out of the company , but had n't set a date for submission of proposals . 
Dunkin ' Donuts Chairman and Chief Executive Robert M. Rosenberg said `` a sale is one alternative being considered , '' but he added the board has n't decided whether to sell the doughnut franchiser . 
DD Acquisition , jointly owned by Unicorp Canada Corp. 's Kingsbridge Capital Group unit and Cara Operations Ltd. , has made a $ 45-a-share tender offer valued at $ 268 million for Dunkin ' Donuts . 
Dunkin ' Donuts ' announcement followed DD Acquisition 's request to the Delaware Court of Chancery Monday to set a trial date for its suit against the company . 
The trial had been postponed to allow Dunkin ' Donuts to seek alternatives to DD Acquisition 's offer . 
Combustion Engineering Inc. said third-quarter net income of $ 22.8 million , reversing a $ 91.7 million year-earlier loss . 
The Stamford , Conn. , power-generation products and services company said per-share earnings were 56 cents compared with the year-ago loss of $ 2.39 . 
Sales fell 1.5 % to $ 884 million from $ 897.2 million . 
Strong profit in the process industries , including chemical and pulp and paper , were offset by higher interest expense and by lower earnings as the company closed out certain long-term contracts . 
Combustion reported improved profits in its automation and control products businesses , and it narrowed its losses in its public sector and environmental segment . 
Power generation had higher sales but lower earnings ; the company cited factors including work on certain low profit-margin contracts from previous years . 
Net in the latest quarter included a pretax gain of $ 22.4 million from the sale of Combustion 's minority interest in Stein Industrie to GEC Alsthom N.V. of the Netherlands . 
Last year 's results reflected a gain of $ 28.2 million on disposition of assets and a $ 165 million pretax provision mainly from costs of completing certain waste-to-energy and other power plants . 
Claude Bebear , chairman and chief executive officer , of Axa-Midi Assurances , pledged to retain employees and management of Farmers Group Inc. , including Leo E. Denlea Jr. , chairman and chief executive officer , if Axa succeeds in acquiring Farmers . 
Mr. Bebear added that the French insurer would keep Farmers ' headquarters in Los Angeles and `` will not send French people to run the company . '' 
Axa would also maintain Farmers ' relationships with the insurance exchanges that it manages . 
Mr. Bebear made his remarks at a breakfast meeting with reporters here yesterday as part of a tour in which he is trying to rally support in the U.S. for the proposed acquisition . 
The bid is part of Sir James Goldsmith 's unfriendly takeover attempt for B.A.T Industries PLC , the British tobacco , retailing , paper and financial-services giant that acquired Farmers last year for $ 5.2 billion . 
Axa has agreed to acquire Farmers from Sir James 's investment vehicle , Hoylake Investments Ltd. , for $ 4.5 billion plus a $ 1 billion investment in Hoylake . 
Any acquisition of Farmers needs the approval of insurance commissioners in the nine states where Farmers operates , and Mr. Bebear 's trip will take him to Idaho , Arizona and New York after his stay here ; he will meet with insurance regulators , legislators , industry excutives and the press . 
Hearings on Axa 's acquisition application have been set for Nov. 13 in Idaho ; Nov. 20 in Illinois ; Nov. 24 and Dec. 4 in Arizona ; Dec. 11 in Washington state ; and Jan. 8 in Oregon . 
Hearings have n't yet been set in Texas , Ohio and Kansas . 
California 's insurance commissioner does n't hold hearings on acquisition applications . 
Although Axa has been rebuffed by Farmers and has n't had any meetings with management , Mr. Bebear nonetheless appears to be trying to woo the company 's executives with promises of autonomy and new-found authority under Axa . 
He said Mr. Denlea would be a member of the top management team of the Axa-Midi group of companies , and would `` help define policies and strategies of the group . '' 
Farmers was quick yesterday to point out the many negative aspects it sees in having Axa as its parent . 
For one , Axa plans to do away with certain tax credits that have resulted in more than $ 600 million paid to the Farmers exchanges during the past few years to offset underwriting losses . 
Those credits result because of taxes that Farmers , as the management company , has paid , and have `` proved to be very important for the exchanges , '' a Farmers spokesman said . 
Mr. Bebear contended that the tax cost to the exchanges under the revised structure would be about $ 8 million a year , which he described as `` peanuts . 
Honeywell Inc. , Minneapolis , said it completed its previously announced sale of 16 % of the shares outstanding in its Japanese joint venture , Yamatake-Honeywell , for $ 280 million . 
The stake was acquired by a group of 10 Japanese financial institutions and industrial corporations , primarily insurance companies , Honeywell said . 
Proceeds will be used to repurchase as many as 10 million shares of Honeywell stock , as previously announced . 
Honeywell said a second sale of Yamatake-Honeywell is still being negotiated . 
The company , which now holds a 34 % stake in the venture , has indicated that it intends to retain at least a 20 % stake long term . 
A 20 % stake would allow Honeywell to include Yamatake earnings in its results . 
A company spokesman said the gain on the sale could n't be estimated until the `` tax treatment has been determined . 
OPPENHEIMER CAPITAL LIMITED PARTNERSHIP increased the quarterly distribution to 40 cents a limited partnership unit from 36.25 cents . 
The distribution represents available cash flow from the partnership between Aug. 1 and Oct. 31 . 
It is payable Nov. 30 to units of record Oct. 31 . 
The money manager is controlled 67.7 % by its top officers and top officers of Oppenheimer & Co. , a securities firm . 
Both firms are in New York . 
Oppenheimer Capital has about 7.9 million limited partnership units outstanding . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , the units closed at $ 15.125 , up 12.5 cents . 
Bank of Montreal said it added 850 million Canadian dollars ( US$ 725.8 million ) to its reserves against losses on Third World loans , bringing the total it has set aside this year to C$ 1 billion . 
The bank said the C$ 1 billion in reserves will result in a charge of C$ 595 million against earnings but said it still expects to report a profit for the year ending Tuesday . 
The bank reported net income of C$ 389 million for the nine months ended July 31 . 
The bank said the increase in loan-loss provisions wo n't affect the payment of dividends . 
The bank said reserves now amount to 61 % of its total less-developed-country exposure . 
Excluding Mexico , reserves equal 95 % of LDC exposure . 
In Toronto Stock Exchange trading , Bank of Montreal closed at C$ 33.25 , up 87.5 Canadian cents . 
Knight-Ridder Inc. said third-quarter earnings jumped 18 % , partly because of the sale of two of its media properties . 
The media concern said net income rose to $ 37.8 million , or 72 cents a share , from $ 32 million , or 57 cents a share , in the year-earlier period . 
The latest results include a gain of $ 4.2 million , or eight cents a share , on the sale of television stations in Oklahoma City and Flint , Mich . 
Revenue increased 7.5 % to $ 540.9 million from $ 503.1 million . 
Robert F. Singleton , Knight-Ridder 's chief financial officer , said the company was `` pleased '' with its overall performance , despite only single-digit growth in newspaper revenue . 
That division 's revenue rose 2.3 % to $ 472.5 million from $ 461.9 million in the year-ago period . 
Gains in advertising revenue , however , resulted in operating profit of $ 78.4 million -- up 20 % from $ 65.6 million . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Knight Ridder closed at $ 51.50 a share , down 12.5 cents . 
ALBERTA ENERGY Co. , Calgary , said it filed a preliminary prospectus for an offering of common shares . 
The natural resources development concern said proceeds will be used to repay long-term debt , which stood at 598 million Canadian dollars ( US$ 510.6 million ) at the end of 1988 . 
The company plans to raise between C$ 75 million and C$ 100 million from the offering , according to a spokeswoman at Richardson Greenshields of Canada Ltd. , lead underwriter . 
The shares will be priced in early November , she said . 
General Electric Co. executives and lawyers provided `` misleading and false '' information to the Pentagon in 1985 in an effort to cover up `` longstanding fraudulent '' billing practices , federal prosecutors alleged in legal briefs . 
The government 's startling allegations , filed only days before the scheduled start of a criminal overcharge trial against GE in Philadelphia federal district court , challenge the motives and veracity of the nation 's third-largest defense contractor . 
In a strongly worded response summarizing a filing made in the same court yesterday , GE asserted that `` prosecutors have misstated the testimony of witnesses , distorted documents and ignored important facts . '' 
The company attacked the government 's allegations as `` reckless and baseless mudslinging , '' and said its management `` promptly and accurately reported '' to the Pentagon all relevant information about billing practices . 
The case strikes at the corporate image of GE , which provides the military with everything from jet engines and electronic warfare equipment to highly classified design work on the Strategic Defense Initiative , and could cause a loss of future defense contracts if Pentagon and Justice Department officials take a tough stance . 
The company has been considered an industry leader in advocating cooperation and voluntary disclosures of improper or inflated billing practices . 
But the government now claims that a group of company managers and lawyers engaged in an elaborate strategy over five years to obscure from federal authorities the extent and details of `` widespread '' fraudulent billing practices . 
The problems were uncovered during a series of internal investigations of the company 's Space Systems division , which has been the focus of two separate overcharge prosecutions by the government since 1985 . 
The dispute stems from pretrial maneuvering in the pending court case , in which prosecutors have been demanding access to a host of internal company memos , reports and documents . 
Last November , a federal grand jury indicted GE on charges of fraud and false claims in connection with an alleged scheme to defraud the Army of $ 21 million on a logistics computer contract . 
The company , for its part , maintains that many of the disputed documents are privileged attorney-client communications that should n't be turned over to prosecutors . 
A hearing is scheduled on the issue today . 
The government 's 136-page filing covers events leading up to the current case and an earlier indictment in March 1985 , when GE was accused of defrauding the Pentagon by illegally claiming cost overruns on Minuteman missile contracts . 
GE pleaded guilty and paid a fine of more than $ 1 million in the Minuteman case , which involved some of the same individuals and operations that are at the center of the dispute in the Philadelphia court . 
In order to show that all of its units had corrected billing problems and therefore should become eligible again for new contracts , prosecutors contend that `` high-level GE executives '' and company lawyers provided `` misleading statements '' to then-Air Force Secretary Verne Orr and other Pentagon officials during a series of meetings in 1985 . 
Overall , the government contends that GE 's disclosure efforts largely were intended to `` curry favor '' with Pentagon officials without detailing the extent of the management lapses and allegedly pervasive billing irregularities uncovered by company investigations . 
Prosecutors depict a company that allegedly sat on damaging evidence of overcharges from 1983 to 1985 , despite warnings from an internal auditor . 
When GE finally disclosed the problems , prosecutors contend that Mr. Orr `` was erroneously informed that the { suspected } practices had only just been discovered '' by GE management . 
In its brief , the government asserted that it needs the internal GE documents to rebut anticipated efforts by GE during the trial to demonstrate `` its good corporate character . '' 
GE , which was surprised by the last-minute subpoena for more than 100 boxes and file cabinets of documents , countered that senior GE managers did n't find out about questionable billing practices until 1985 , and that the information was passed on quickly to Mr. Orr at his first meeting with company representatives . 
Subsequent meetings , initiated after the company and two of its units were briefly suspended from federal contracts , were held to familiarize Mr. Orr with the company 's self-policing procedures and to disclose additional information , according to GE . 
GE 's filing contends that the billing practices at the heart of the current controversy involved technical disputes rather than criminal activity . 
The company 's conduct `` does not even raise a question of wrongful corporate intent , ratification or cover-up , '' GE 's brief asserts . 
`` On the contrary , it shows a corporation reacting swiftly and aggressively to very difficult issues in largely uncharted waters . '' 
Mr. Orr could n't be reached for comment yesterday . 
Applied Solar Energy Corp. of City of Industry , Calif. , said it and its majority shareholder , American Cyanamid Co. , signed a non-binding letter of intent for the acquisition of Applied Solar by McDonnell Douglas Corp. for about $ 38 million . 
The proposed acquisition provides for a cash payment of $ 10 a share at closing and a contingent payment of as much as 80 cents a share placed in escrow . 
Details of the escrow agreement have n't been completed , the companies said . 
There are 3.5 million shares of Applied Solar , of which American Cyanamid owns 2.7 million . 
American Cyanamid is a Wayne , N.J. , chemicals , drugs and fertilizer concern . 
Completion of the acquisition is subject to execution of a definitive agreement , approval by all three companies ' boards and the approval of Applied Solar 's shareholders . 
An Applied Solar spokesman said completion is expected at the end of the year or early next year . 
A spokeswoman for the St. Louis aerospace and defense concern said it wanted the acquistion because Applied Solar is involved in solar cells and solid-state laser components , and this fits with McDonnell 's business of laser applications for military space . 
Trading in Cineplex Odeon Corp. shares was halted on the New York and Toronto stock exchanges late yesterday afternoon at the company 's request , Toronto Stock Exchange officials said . 
Brian Hemming , a spokesman for the company 's committee of independent directors , established in May to solicit and evaluate offers for the company , said it was expected to make an announcement early this morning . 
But Mr. Hemming said he was n't aware of the nature of the talks under way between committee members and their advisers . 
Cineplex traded on the New York Stock Exchange at $ 11.25 a share , up $ 1.125 , before trading was halted . 
Analysts have speculated in recent days that the value of offers received by the committee fell well short of what they had hoped , or even that the company 's chairman , president and chief executive officer , Garth Drabinsky , is the only bidder for the company as a whole . 
The current effort to auction off the company was triggered by a dispute between Mr. Drabinsky and the Toronto-based movie chain 's major shareholder , MCA Inc . 
London share prices closed sharply lower Tuesday on the back of Wall Street 's steep drop and renewed fears over U.K. economic fundamentals . 
Tokyo 's winning streak came to an end , and stocks fell in Frankfurt and across Europe as well . 
London 's Financial Times 100-share index shed 40.4 points to finish at 2149.3 . 
At London 's close , the Dow Jones Industrial Average was 51.23 points lower at 2611.68 . 
Dealers said the initial pressure came from mildly disappointing U.K. trade figures for September and a worrisome report by the Confederation of British Industry that a decline in orders for manufactured goods is depressing both business optimism and investment plans for the coming year . 
The trade and CBI reports refocused attention on high interest rates and corporate profitability and helped rekindle underlying concerns over prospects for a recession in the U.K. , dealers said . 
The 30-share index fell 33.3 points to 1739.3 . 
Volume was a modest 405.4 million shares traded , but better than the year 's lowest turnover of 276.8 million Monday . 
Market watchers also noted an absence of institutional interest later in the session helped pave the way for broader declines when Wall Street opened weaker . 
They added that market-makers were knocking share prices down in midafternoon in a bid to attract some interest , but the action largely helped open the way for London 's late declines . 
Insurance stocks provided some early support to the market , partly on favorable brokerage recommendatons and talk of continental European interest in British life and composite insurers . 
British life insurer London & General , which firmed 2 pence to 356 pence ( $ 5.70 ) , and composite insurer Royal Insurance , which finished 13 lower at 475 , were featured in the talk . 
On the life insurance side , Pearl Group finished 5 lower at 640 , and Sun Life dropped 15 to # 11.53 . 
Jaguar finished 4 lower at 694 . 
Dealers said the market did n't react substantially to Ford Motor Co. 's disclosure to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission that it will seek 100 % of Jaguar 's shares outstanding when U.K. government share regulations are lifted at the end of next year . 
Tokyo stocks closed easier , posting their first loss in six trading days , partly because of programmed index-linked selling by trust investment funds in the afternoon session . 
The Nikkei index fell 58.97 points to 35526.55 . 
The index gained 99.14 points Monday . 
In early trading in Tokyo Wednesday , the Nikkei index rose 17.92 points to 35544.47 . 
On Tuesday , the Tokyo stock price index of all first section issues was down 6.31 at 2681.22 . 
First section volume was estimated at 900 million shares , up from 605 million Monday . 
Observers said the market again failed to find a trading focus , discouraging much participation by investors . 
The market , however , is expected to remain stable and expectations for future gains are high , traders said . 
Such sentiment is being supported by word that a large amount of cash from investment trust funds is scheduled to enter the market later this week and in early November . 
The expected amount is said to be 700 billion yen ( $ 4.93 billion ) to 1.05 trillion yen -- the second largest amount this year in a given period , following the record high set at the end of July , according to market observers . 
In addition to a large amount of investment trust fund cash , analysts generally see the market environment improving compared with the past couple of weeks . 
Toshiyuki Nishimura , an analyst at Yamaichi Securities , said , `` The market sentiment is bullish , simply because there are few bad factors . '' 
Buying activity Tuesday centered on a wide range of midcapitalization , domestic demand-related shares whose prices range from 1,000 to 2,000 yen . 
Investors expect these shares will be targets of investment trust funds , which often buy small amounts spread across a wide range of issues . 
On the other hand , high-priced shares such as Pioneer Electronic and Sony failed to spark investor interest because these issues are unlikely to be bought by investment trust funds , observers said . 
Tuesday 's notable losers were highpriced shares such as Pioneer , which shed 210 yen to 5,900 yen . 
Sony was down 130 to 8,590 . 
TDK fell 120 to 5,960 , Fuji Photo Film declined 160 to 4,830 , and Fanuc dropped 160 to 7,440 . 
Share prices on the Frankfurt stock exchange closed sharply lower in thin dealings as worried investors remained idle as the result of two potentially destabilizing domestic developments . 
The DAX index fell 15.85 to end at 1507.37 . 
Cutting against the downward trend was Continental , which jumped 4 marks to 346 marks ( $ 187 ) in heavy trading on rumors that the tire maker is about to be taken over . 
It jumped 7.5 Monday . 
Traders said the market was exceptionally thin , as small investors remain on the sidelines . 
Market participants say investors are not only licking their wounds following the turbulence last week , but they have also been made nervous by two events in West Germany . 
On Sunday , the governing Christian Democratic Union suffered a series of setbacks , the extent of which became fully known only late Monday , in municipal elections in Baden-Wuerttemberg . 
Traders say investors are worried that the CDU wo n't be able to hold office in federal elections at the end of 1990 . 
And statements by the chairman of the IG Metall labor union , Franz Steinkuehler , also cast a cloud over trading , dealers said . 
Mr. Steinkuehler said at a convention in West Berlin that the union has to prepare for `` a big fight '' to achieve its main goal of a 35-hour workweek , down from current 37-hour workweek . 
The decline in prices cut broadly through the blue-chip issues , as Siemens tumbled 7.5 to 544 , Deutsche Bank plunged 7 to 657 , and the auto makers fell sharply as well . 
Daimler-Benz dropped 12.5 to 710.5 , Bayerische Motoren Werke dropped 10.5 to 543.5 , and Volkswagen lost 7.1 . 
Elsewhere , share prices closed lower in Zurich , Amsterdam , Milan and Stockholm . 
Uneasiness about Wall Street was cited in several markets . 
Prices closed lower in Sydney , Singapore and Wellington , were mixed in Hong Kong and higher in Taipei , Manila , Paris , Brussels and Seoul . 
Here are price trends on the world 's major stock markets , as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective , Geneva . 
To make them directly comparable , each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100 . 
The percentage change is since year-end . 
Directors of Bergen Bank and Den Norske Creditbank , two of Norway 's leading banks , announced they had agreed to the formal merger of the banks . 
The merger would create Scandinavia 's seventh largest bank , with combined assets of 210 billion Norwegian kroner ( $ 30.3 billion ) . 
The banks said an application for a concession to merge into one entity to be called Den Norske Bank AS was sent Monday to the Finance Ministry . 
The two boards said in a joint statement that the proposed merger agreement was considered in separate board meetings in Oslo Monday . 
They said the agreement will be submitted to their respective supervisory boards next Wednesday . 
Extraordinary general meetings , to be held Nov. 28 , will decide the share exchange ratio . 
The merger requires the approval of Norwegian authorities . 
Savings and loans reject blacks for mortgage loans twice as often as they reject whites , the Office of Thrift Supervision said . 
But that does n't necessarily mean thrifts are discriminating against blacks , the agency said . 
The office , an arm of the Treasury , said it does n't have data on the financial position of applicants and thus ca n't determine why blacks are rejected more often . 
Nevertheless , on Capitol Hill , where the information was released yesterday at a Senate banking subcommittee hearing , lawmakers said they are worried that financial institutions are routinely discriminating against minorities . 
They asked regulators to suggest new ways to force banks and thrifts to comply with anti-discrimination laws . 
Sen. Alan Dixon ( D , Ill. ) , chairman of the subcommittee on consumer and regulatory affairs , said , `` I 'm not a statistician . 
But when blacks are getting their loan applications rejected twice as often as whites -- and in some cities , it is three and four times as often -- I conclude that discrimination is part of the problem . '' 
James Grohl , a spokesman for the U.S. League of Savings Institutions , said , `` The data is a red flag , but lacking the financial data you ca n't make a case that discrimination is widespread . '' 
The trade group official added : `` Certainly the federal government should take a hard look at it . '' 
Sen. Dixon held the hearing to follow up on a provision in the savings and loan bailout bill that required regulators to report on evidence of discimination in mortgage lending . 
The legislation also requires broad new disclosures of the race , sex and income level of borrowers , but that information wo n't be gathered in new studies for several months at least . 
The Federal Reserve said its studies in recent years , which adjust for income differences and other variables , showed that blacks received fewer home mortgages from banks and thrifts than whites . 
But John LaWare , a Fed governor , told the subcommittee the evidence is mixed and that the Fed 's believes the vast majority of banks are n't discriminating . 
For instance , he noted , the Fed studies have shown that blacks receive more home improvement loans than whites . 
Several lawmakers were angered that the bank and thrift regulators generally said they have been too busy handling the record number of bank and thrift failures in the past few years to put much energy into investigating possible discrimination . 
`` We would be the first to admit that we have not devoted the necessary amount of emphasis over the past several years '' to developing examinations for discrimination , said Jonathan Fiechter , a top official of the Office of Thrift Supervision . 
`` If we 've got folks out there who are being turned away in the mortgage market improperly and unfairly , '' said Sen. Donald Riegle ( D. , Mich. ) , chairman of the banking committee , `` then that is a matter that needs remedy now , not six months from now , or six years from now , or 26 years from now . '' 
Officials of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency said they have punished only a few banks for violations of anti-discrimination laws . 
The FDIC said it has issued five citations to banks over the past three years for discriminatory practices . 
The comptroller 's office said it found no indications of illegal discrimination in 3,437 examinations of banks since April 1987 . 
The comptroller 's office also said that of 37,000 complaints it received since January 1987 , only 16 alleged racial discrimination in real estate lending . 
The agency investigated the complaints but no violations were cited . 
Thrift regulators did n't give any figures on their enforcement actions . 
Mr. Fiechter said that among the possibilities being considered by regulators to fight discrimination is the use of `` testers '' -- government investigators who would pose as home buyers . 
The Department of Housing and Urban Development has used testers to investigate discrimination in rental housing . 
Using testers could be controversial with financial institutions , but Mr. Grohl said the U.S. League of Savings Institutions had n't yet taken any position on the matter . 
Time Warner Inc. is considering a legal challenge to Tele-Communications Inc. 's plan to buy half of Showtime Networks Inc. , a move that could lead to all-out war between the cable industry 's two most powerful players . 
Time is also fighting the transaction on other fronts , by attempting to discourage other cable operators from joining Tele-Communications as investors in Showtime , cable-TV industry executives say . 
Time officials declined to comment . 
Last week , Tele-Communications agreed to pay Viacom Inc. $ 225 million for a 50 % stake in its Showtime subsidiary , which is a distant second to Time 's Home Box Office in the delivery of pay-TV networks to cable subscribers . 
Tele-Communications , the U.S. 's largest cable company , said it may seek other cable partners to join in its investment . 
Tele-Communications is HBO 's largest customer , and the two have a number of other business relationships . 
Earlier this year , Time even discussed bringing Tele-Communications in as an investor in HBO , executives at both companies said . 
The purchase of the Showtime stake is `` a direct slap in our face , '' said one senior Time executive . 
Time is expected to mount a legal challenge in U.S. District Court in New York , where Viacom in May filed a $ 2.5 billion antitrust suit charging Time and HBO with monopolizing the pay-TV business and trying to crush competition from Showtime . 
Executives involved in plotting Time 's defense say it is now preparing a countersuit naming both Viacom and Tele-Communications as defendants . 
The executives say Time may seek to break up the transaction after it is consummated , or may seek constraints that would prevent Tele-Communications from dropping HBO in any of its cable systems in favor of Showtime . 
Viacom officials declined to comment . 
Jerome Kern , Tele-Communications ' chief outside counsel , said he was n't aware of Time 's legal plans . 
But he said that any effort by Time to characterize the Tele-Communications investment in Showtime as anti-competitive would be `` the pot calling the kettle black . '' 
`` It 's hard to see how an investment by the largest { cable operator } in the weaker of the two networks is anti-competitive , when the stronger of the two networks is owned by the second largest '' cable operator , Mr. Kern said . 
In addition to owning HBO , with 22 million subscribers , Time Warner separately operates cable-TV system serving about 5.6 million cable-TV subscribers . 
Tele-Communications controls close to 12 million cable subscribers , and Viacom has about one million . 
In its suit against Time , Viacom says the ownership of both cable systems and cable-programming networks gives the company too much market power . 
Time argues that in joining up with Tele-Communications , Viacom has potentially more power , particularly since Viacom also owns cable networks MTV , VH-1 and Nick at Nite . 
Ironically , Tele-Communications and Time have often worked closely in the cable business . 
Together , they control nearly 40 % of Turner Broadcasting Systems Inc. ; Tele-Communications has a 21.8 % stake , while Time Warner has a 17.8 % stake . 
But since Time 's merger with Warner Communications Inc. , relations between the two have become strained . 
Each company worries that the other is becoming too powerful and too vertically integrated . 
Meanwhile , some legal observers say the Tele-Communications investment and other developments are weakening Viacom 's antitrust suit against Time . 
Viacom accuses Time in its suit of refusing to carry Showtime or a sister service , The Movie Channel , on Time 's Manhattan Cable TV system , one of the nation 's largest urban systems . 
But yesterday , Manhattan Cable announced it will launch Showtime on Nov. 1 to over 230,000 subscribers . 
Showtime has also accused HBO of locking up the lion 's share of Hollywood 's movies by signing exclusive contracts with all the major studios . 
But Showtime has continued to sign new contracts with Hollywood studios , and yesterday announced it will buy movies from Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. , which currently has a non-exclusive arrangement with HBO . 
The Federal Trade Commission said it authorized its staff to seek a preliminary injunction barring Imo Industries Inc. from acquiring the shares outstanding of the U.S. unit of the British company , United Scientific Holdings PLC , for $ 69 million . 
The FTC said it `` had reason to believe that the proposed acquisition could substantially reduce competition '' in the production of certain image intensifier tubes , which are important components of night-vision devices sold primarily to the defense industry . 
The FTC said it would seek to enjoin the proposed acquisition in a federal trial court , but declined to specify which one . 
Under federal law , if the court grants a preliminary injunction , the FTC must begin administrative proceedings to determine the legality of the proposed stock purchase within 20 days . 
Officials at the United Scientific unit , Optic-Electronic Corp. of Garland , Texas , and at Imo Industries of Lawrenceville , N.J. , could n't be reached for comment . 
The airline industry 's fortunes , in dazzling shape for most of the year , have taken a sudden turn for the worse in the past few weeks . 
Citing rising fuel costs , promotional fare cuts and a general slowdown in travel , several major carriers have posted or are expected to post relatively poor third-quarter results . 
Yesterday , USAir Group Inc. , recently one of the industry 's stellar performers , posted a worse-than-expected $ 77.7 million net loss for the period . 
So far , the industry 's fourth quarter is n't looking too strong either , prompting many analysts to slash earning projections for the rest of the year by as much as one-fourth . 
And they say the outlook for 1990 is nearly as bad . 
Airlines in 1989 `` came in like a bang and are going out like a whimper , '' said Kevin Murphy , an airline analyst at Morgan Stanley & Co . 
This turn of events has put a big damper on an industry that seemed almost invincible last spring , when fares were rising at double-digit rates and many carriers seemed to be growing fat on near-monopolies in certain markets . 
Now , many airline companies might become a lot less attractive as takeover targets on Wall Street . 
The downturn also raises questions about the carriers ' ambitious orders for new airplanes , which currently total $ 32.5 billion over the next three years . 
For travelers , though , the industry 's problems have had some positive effects . 
In recent weeks , airlines have cut numerous fares in leisure markets to try to win back customers . 
Others have tried to spruce up frequent-flier programs . 
Previously , airlines were limiting the programs because they were becoming too expensive . 
Just last week , for example , Trans World Airlines and Pan Am Corp. 's Pan American World Airways went so far as to offer cash rebates or gift checks of $ 200 to $ 1,000 to certain frequent-flier members making trans-Atlantic flights in business class or first class . 
The industry 's slowdown became apparent this month when AMR Corp. , parent of American Airlines , reported an 8.8 % drop in third-quarter net income and said its fourth quarter would be `` disappointing . '' 
Shortly before that , USAir had said its third-quarter results would be `` significantly lower '' than a year earlier . 
Yesterday , it provided the details : 
Its loss of $ 77.7 million , or $ 1.86 a share , contrasted with net of $ 68.5 million , or $ 1.58 a share , in the 1988 third quarter . 
Revenue rose only 3.3 % in the latest period , to $ 1.53 billion from $ 1.48 billion . 
For the nine months , the Arlington , Va. , company 's net plunged 73 % to $ 38.5 million , or 76 cents a share , from $ 142.2 million , or $ 3.28 a share . 
Revenue rose 12 % to $ 4.75 billion from $ 4.22 billion . 
The results surprised many analysts , because USAir has almost no competition in its Pittsburgh hub and has expanded operations by completing its acquisition of Piedmont Airlines . 
Shortly after announcing its quarterly loss , USAir 's stock tumbled $ 3 a share . 
It ended at $ 40.125 , down $ 2.375 , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
`` Nobody was expecting this size of a loss , '' said Paul Karos , an analyst with First Boston Corp . 
One airline executive , who declined to be identified , called the loss `` amazing . '' 
In announcing the results , USAir cited many of the same problems that several other industry officials have named recently . 
It said the industry 's domestic traffic was flat in the third quarter ; analysts say this was because hefty fare increases earlier in the year scared off many leisure travelers this summer . 
To try to combat the traffic slowdown , airlines started reducing fares ; average fares rose only 1.7 % in August , in contrast to increases of 16 % each in February and March . 
But so far , the effort has failed , and traffic is still slow . 
Some other fare promotions have backfired . 
This summer , the industry introduced a `` kids fly free '' program , in which children were allowed to fly free if they were traveling with an adult . 
Airlines tried to restrict the program substantially by limiting the offer to certain days of the week , but it still was apparently used far more heavily than the airlines expected . 
Airlines also say their frequent-flier programs are squeezing profits because awards are being redeemed at a heavier-than-normal rate . 
One airline official said about three times as many free-travel coupons are being turned in as in previous years -- not surprisingly , as the airlines last year allowed many travelers to build up mileage at triple the normal rate . 
Rising operating expenses are another problem . 
Fuel costs were up 10 % in the third quarter . 
Labor costs , which leveled off in the past few years because of lower pay scales for newer employees , are on the upswing again at many carriers . 
And some carriers are facing other unexpected headaches : USAir , for example , blamed some of its loss on merger expenses and on disruptions caused by Hurricane Hugo last month . 
`` We can not quantify the total adverse effects of Hugo , '' said Edwin Colodny , chairman and president of USAir Group . 
Whatever the cause for the downturn , few people are predicting any sudden improvement . 
Airline Economics Inc. , an aviation consulting firm , is projecting an industrywide operating profit of $ 2.5 billion for 1989 , compared with earlier forecasts of $ 3 billion to $ 3.5 billion . 
As for 1990 , the firm predicts that profit will slip to between $ 1 billion and $ 1.5 billion . 
Good grief ! 
Charlie Brown is selling out . 
Those Metropolitan Life ads were bad enough . 
But now , Charlie Brown is about to start pitching everything from Chex Party Mix to light bulbs . 
Why is he cashing in now ? 
Turns out that next year , Charlie Brown , Snoopy and the gang turn 40 -- and Scripps Howard 's United Media unit , the syndicator and licensing agent for Charles Schulz 's comic strip , sees a bonanza in licensing the cartoon characters to a bevy of advertisers for ads , tie-ins and promotions . 
`` Peanuts has become a major part of American culture , '' says Peter Shore , United Media 's vice president of marketing and licensing . 
The comic strip `` has a magical , everlasting quality about it . 
Our plan is to honor Charles Schulz and the strip all year long . '' 
The effort will make the Peanuts gang very familiar pitchmen in 1990 . 
General Electric plans to use the characters to plug its Miser light bulb . 
Teleflora will run TV ads at Valentine 's Day promoting its `` Snoopy 's Love Bouquet . '' 
Ralston Purina will promote its Chex Party Mix 's three new flavor packets named for Charlie Brown , Lucy and Linus . 
The characters will also be featured in a new public service effort for the United Way . 
Beyond the advertisements , the syndicator is planning a traveling arena show , new TV specials for CBS and even an exhibit at the Smithsonian Institute . 
The yearlong schedule of festivities will be kicked off officially with a combination live and animation half-time special at the Super Bowl in January . 
All the tie-ins , though , have some marketing experts questioning whether the party may go too far . 
`` There are too many people participating , '' says Al Ries , of Trout & Ries , a Greenwich , Conn. , marketing consulting firm . 
`` If you want to cut through the clutter , you have to make your message as distinct , sharp and individual as possible . 
Sharing a character with other advertisers is n't a way to do that . '' 
But United Media says it 's very scrupulous with the contracts it hands out . 
`` We 're not interested in promoting every single product that comes along , '' Mr. Shore says . 
Metropolitan Life ad executives could n't be reached about the use of the Peanuts characters by others . 
But Mr. Shore says that company 's exclusive advertising rights extend only to the insurance and financial services category . 
Berry Rejoins WPP Group 
Norman Berry , the creative executive who was apparently squeezed out of Ogilvy & Mather in June , is returning to Ogilvy 's parent company , WPP Group PLC . 
Mr. Berry , 58 , had resigned after being asked by Ogilvy 's chairman and chief executive officer , Kenneth Roman , to give up his title as creative head of the New York office and to take a fuzzier international role . 
Yesterday , just a day after Mr. Roman announced he would leave to take a top post at American Express , WPP said Mr. Berry would return to take an international role at the parent company . 
Mr. Berry said the timing was a coincidence and that his decision was unrelated to Mr. Roman 's departure . 
RJR Taps FCB / Leber 
RJR Nabisco Inc. awarded its national broadcast media-buying assignment to FCB / Leber Katz Partners , the New York outpost of Chicago-based Foote , Cone & Belding . 
The naming of FCB / Leber Katz Partners as agency of record for Nabisco Brands Inc. and Planters LifeSavers Co. follows RJR Nabisco 's announcement last week that it will disband its RJR Nabisco Broadcast division and dismiss its 14 employees Dec. 1. to cut costs . 
New York-based RJR Nabisco would n't say what it spends annually , but industry executives say it will spend more than $ 140 million this year , down from about $ 200 million last year . 
Ad Notes ... . 
EARNINGS : 
Interpublic Group of Cos. said third-quarter net rose 15 % to $ 6.9 million , or 21 cents a share , from $ 6 million , or 18 cents a share , in the year-earlier period . 
Revenue increased more than 5 % to $ 283.2 million from $ 268.6 million . 
HOLIDAY PROMOTION : 
PepsiCo Inc. will give away 4,000 sets of `` Game Boy , '' Nintendo 's new hand-held video game in a two-month promotion scheduled to begin Nov. 1 . 
Pepsi said it will spend $ 10 million advertising the promotion . 
International Business Machines Corp. agreed to acquire a 15 % stake in Paxus Corp. , an Australian computer-software and information-services concern , for 20 million Australian dollars ( US$ 17 million ) . 
The investment will be made through IBM Australia Ltd. , a unit of IBM , the two companies said yesterday . 
IBM can raise its stake in Paxus to 20 % over three years , but agreed to not go beyond 20 % in that time . 
Paxus said in a statement it has several `` well developed product and services relationships '' with the U.S. computer company , and plans to expand these links . 
The company earns about half its revenue overseas and plans further expansion . 
A majority stake in Paxus currently held by NZI Corp. will be diluted to slightly less than 50 % after IBM acquires its interest . 
The agreement requires approval from Australia 's Foreign Investment Review Board and National Companies and Securities Commission , and from shareholders of Paxus . 
Bond Corp . Holdings Ltd. 's consolidated debt totals 6.9 billion Australian dollars ( US$ 5.32 billion ) , including A$ 1.6 billion of bonds convertible into shares . 
Alan Bond , chairman and controlling shareholder of the cash-strapped Australian media , brewing , resources and property concern , disclosed the debt figures yesterday . 
The disclosure follows last Friday 's news that Bond Corp. incurred an overall loss of A$ 980.2 million for the fiscal year ended June 30 , the largest loss in Australian corporate history . 
The debt load would have been higher but for a reduction of A$ 5 billion over the past year from asset sales , Mr. Bond said at a business gathering . 
Mr. Bond indicated the consolidated debt figures , which include debt of units such as Bell Group Ltd. , will be published soon in Bond Corp. 's 1989 annual accounts . 
He predicted the debt will be reduced by another A$ 3.8 billion this fiscal year ending June 30 , 1990 , but did n't explain how this will be achieved . 
Mr. Bond blamed rising Australian interest rates and the acquisition of Bell Group `` with its very high levels of shortterm debt '' for producing a condition `` that was no longer sustainable . 
`` In order to restore confidence and ensure the support of our principal lenders , '' Mr. Bond said , `` we embarked on fundamantal changes in the structure and direction of the group . '' 
That reassessment resulted in continuing asset sales , as well as write-offs exceeding A$ 1.1 billion last fiscal year . 
`` In essence we have made a decision to clear the decks , '' Mr. Bond told the meeting . 
While some assets have been written down , others are undervalued in the accounts , Mr. Bond maintained . 
Among these are the company 's Australian brewing assets , in the books at A$ 950 million but actually worth A$ 2.5 billion , he said . 
An investment in Chile 's telephone company is carried at US$ 300 million but really worth US$ 500 million , and the company 's property portfolio is undervalued by at least A$ 250 million , Mr. Bond said . 
Mr. Bond forecast that by next June , `` what will emerge will be a company with a honed sense of purpose ... a stable balance sheet , with good-quality assets in brewing , telecommunications , media and property . '' 
He did n't name energy resources in that list , signaling that all the company 's coal and oil interests might be for sale in total or in part . 
Some of the oil interests already have been sold . 
Mercedes-Benz of North America Inc. , Grosse Pointe Shores , Mich. , estimated it will sell about as many cars in 1990 as the 75,000 it expects to deliver this year . 
Mercedes officials said they expect flat sales next year even though they see the U.S. luxury-car market expanding slightly . 
Erich Krampe , president of the U.S. sales arm of West German auto maker Daimler Benz AG , predicted luxury-car sales will rise to 840,000 in 1990 from 830,000 this year primarily because of the new Japanese makes . 
Most of the growth , he said , will come in the $ 35,000-to-$50,000 price range , where Mercedes has a 35 % U.S. market share . 
Mercedes sold 82,348 cars in 1988 . 
Mr. Krampe also said that Mercedes plans to bring out new models every year through the mid-1990s and it will shorten its product development cycle to eight years from 10 or 12 years to compete more effectively with Toyota Motor Corp. 's Lexus , Nissan Motor Co. 's Infiniti and Honda Motor Co. 's Acura luxury-car divisions . 
Homestake Mining Co. , San Francisco , blamed the continued slump in gold prices for an 83 % plunge in third-quarter net income to $ 2 million , or two cents a share , from $ 11.2 million , or 12 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue rose 5 % to $ 110.4 million from $ 105.4 million . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Homestake closed at $ 15.25 , down 25 cents . 
`` A significant increase in gold sales to 248,279 ounces for the quarter from 188,726 in the third quarter of 1988 was more than offset by the continued decline in average gold price realization to $ 367 from $ 429 per ounce , '' the company said . 
For the nine months , the mining company posted a 40 % drop in profit to $ 30.1 million , or 31 cents a share , from $ 50.6 million , or 52 cents a share , on a 6 % rise in revenue to $ 323.2 million from $ 305.7 million . 
The Treasury plans to raise $ 1.8 billion in new cash with the sale Monday of about $ 15.6 billion in short-term bills to redeem $ 13.81 billion in maturing bills . 
The offering will be divided evenly between 13-week and 26-week bills maturing Feb. 1 , 1990 , and May 3 , 1990 , respectively . 
Tenders for the bills , available in minimum $ 10,000 denominations , must be received by 1 p.m. EST Monday at the Treasury or at Federal Reserve banks or branches . 
The Treasury said it will alter the auctions unless it has assurance of enactment of legislation to raise the statutory debt limit before the scheduled auctions Monday . 
Apogee Enterprises Inc. said profit for the third quarter ending Dec. 2 will fall below the year-earlier results because of an after-tax charge of $ 1.9 million related to a project that was guaranteed by the company . 
A year ago , the Minneapolis glass products and aluminum window maker earned $ 4 million , or 30 cents a share , on revenue of $ 114 million . 
Apogee said the charge stems from a building supply contract in which the company guaranteed a contractor 's performance . 
Apogee said a subcontractor had severe cost overruns and was unable to fulfill the contract terms on its own , making it necessary for Apogee to advance cash to ensure completion of the project . 
The company said its core businesses have performed well and it expects them to continue to do so in the remainder of the fiscal year . 
Japan 's production of cars , trucks and buses in September fell 4.1 % from a year ago to 1,120,317 units because of a slip in exports , the Japan Automobile Manufacturers ' Association said . 
Domestic demand continues to grow , but its contribution to higher production was sapped in September by the estimated 2 % fall in imports , accompanied by a growing tendency for Japanese manufacturers to build vehicles overseas , according to the association . 
The association said domestic demand grew 8.8 % in September . 
Demand has been growing consistently under the encouragement of pro-consumption government policies , an association spokesman said . 
He also said the introduction of a 3 % consumption tax in April has helped sales . 
The new tax , though a source of general resentment among Japanese taxpayers , replaced a higher commodities tax that applied to automobiles . 
Japanese domestic motor-vehicle sales rose 12 % in September , the Japan Automobile Dealers ' Association said earlier this month . 
The manufacturers ' association will issue statistics on vehicle exports later this month . 
Production of cars rose to 801,835 units in September , a 5.5 % increase from a year earlier . 
Midsized cars accounted for the greatest growth in units , rising 62,872 units to 134,550 units , or 88 % . 
Minicar output more than tripled . 
Manufacturers produced 46,835 of the vehicles -- which have engines of 500 cubic centimeters or less -- an increase of 31,777 units . 
Total truck production fell 22 % from a year earlier to 315,546 units . 
Minitruck production fell 13 % to 94,243 units . 
Bus production also slipped , by 49 % from a year earlier to 2,936 units . 
The association spokesman said bus production has declined since January , but could n't offer an explanation for the fall . 
Auto production for the first half of the fiscal year , which began in August , totaled 6,379,884 units , the association said . 
Half-year production was up 3.4 % compared with the same period a year earlier . 
Stock of United Airlines parent UAL Corp. gyrated wildly yesterday amid speculation that one or more investors may challenge the UAL board 's decision to remain independent instead of pursuing a buy-out or other transaction . 
The board 's decision , announced after the market closed Monday , initially prompted a severe sell-off in UAL shares , which at midday traded as low as $ 145 a share , down $ 33 a share , in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
The deepening bloodbath for takeover-stock traders , who by then had seen UAL stock tumble 49 % since Oct. 12 , also triggered a marketwide sell-off that sent the Dow Jones Industrial Average down more than 80 points at 10:40 a.m . 
But then steady , concentrated buying by Bear , Stearns & Co. , which frequently buys stock for corporate raiders , took hold and steadied the fall in UAL , which eventually buoyed the entire market . 
The industrial average closed down only 3.69 points at 2659.22 . 
Late in the afternoon , several big purchases by Bear , Stearns , particularly a block of 200,000 shares at 2:43 p.m. at $ 150 a share , triggered a buying spree that took UAL up more than 18 points in the final hour of trading . 
UAL stock closed at $ 170 a share , down $ 8.375 . 
Volume was a tumultuous 4.9 million shares , or 22 % of the 21.8 million UAL shares outstanding . 
Traders estimated that Bear , Stearns bought more than 1 million shares . 
The two most frequently rumored buyers , neither of whom would comment , were Coniston Partners , which battled the UAL board in 1987 , and New York real estate developer Donald Trump , who recently made and withdrew an offer for American Airlines parent AMR Corp . 
However , one person familiar with UAL said the signs pointed to Coniston because Mr. Trump has n't asked for permission to buy more than $ 15 million of stock under federal antitrust rules . 
Takeover-stock traders , stung by their huge losses in UAL stock , remained eager for some action by an outside catalyst following the collapse Oct. 13 of a $ 300-a-share , $ 6.79 billion labor-management buy-out . 
Their hope was that the catalyst would seek to oust the board in a solicitation of shareholder consents . 
Baker , Nye Investments , a New York takeover-stock trader that owns UAL stock , would n't comment on reports the firm is considering seeking such a shareholder vote . 
But partner Richard Nye said , `` This is the most extraordinary failed transaction I 've seen in 25 years in this business . 
It would make sense for somebody to do it . 
I have never seen a case of incompetence shared by so many participants . '' 
In 1986 , Baker , Nye waged a proxy fight for control of Leaseway Transportation Inc. that ultimately led to Leaseway 's being sold . 
Some traders pointed hopefully to earlier estimates by UAL 's investment adviser , First Boston Corp. , that recapitalizations could yield $ 245 to $ 280 a share . 
But those would require pilots ' cooperation . 
Any investor who acquires UAL stock in an attempt to force a buy-out or recapitalization must deal with United 's contentious unions . 
The pilots are working under an expired contract , and the machinists contract expires next month . 
That gives them enormous leverage , including the threat of a strike to block any buy-out or recapitalization attempt they oppose . 
However , a catalyst like Coniston could seek shareholder support for a sale to a labor-management group at the last price discussed by that group before the board meeting Monday . 
The pilots had been working on a buy-out bid between $ 225 and $ 240 a share , or $ 5.09 billion to $ 5.42 billion . 
One person familiar with UAL said the unsettled labor situation and the uncertain world-wide financial markets contributed to the board 's decision to avoid `` rushing around selling the company at a bargain price , '' particularly since it accepted a $ 300-a-share offer just last month . 
Even some takeover-stock traders said they could n't quarrel with the board 's logic . 
But the board 's decision prompted many to bail out of the stock yesterday . 
`` We had a lot of people who threw in the towel today , '' said Earl Ellis , a partner in Benjamin Jacobson & Sons , a specialist in trading UAL stock on the Big Board . 
Another trader noted that many arbitrage firms are afraid to sell their UAL stock at the bottom , but already own so much they ca n't buy any more . 
`` This deal is like a Roach Motel , '' he said . 
`` They check in , but they ca n't check out . '' 
But both the traders and the pilots remain interested in some transaction . 
So too , according to many reports , is British Airways PLC , despite its public withdrawal from the buy-out . 
The pilots might end up teaming up with their longtime adversaries , the machinists union , in a recapitalization . 
The machinists are reviewing proposals they made in the past for recapitalizations that would pay a special shareholder dividend and give employees a minority stake . 
The company rejected those past proposals . 
It is unclear , however , if the machinists would support a majority stake , as the pilots want . 
A machinist official said that would depend on how much in concessions machinists would have to give in return for the majority stake . 
Some investors whose names were bandied about by traders as potential UAL stock buyers said they were n't buying . 
`` I 'm not interested , '' said Dallas investor Harold Simmons . 
A source close to Carl Icahn , a corporate raider who owns Trans World Airlines Inc. , said he has n't owned any UAL stock and is n't buying . 
One person familiar with Texas billionaire Robert Bass said he is n't likely to make any hostile moves . 
And a spokesman for Reliance Group Holdings Inc. , which had held 7 % of UAL before the first buy-out bid but later reduced its holdings below 5 % , would n't comment . 
Marvin Davis , whose $ 5.4 billion takeover bid originally put the nation 's second-largest airline in play , is limited by a standstill agreement with UAL he signed in September . 
The Los Angeles investor ca n't buy UAL stock , solicit shareholder consents or make a new offer unless he makes a formal offer of $ 300 a share or UAL accepts an offer below $ 300 . 
However , Mr. Davis could pressure the board by asking that the agreement be waived , or letting it be known that he has financing for an offer at a lower price . 
Times Mirror Co. said third-quarter net income fell 13 % to $ 70.1 million , or 54 cents a share , compared with net income of $ 81 million , or 62 cents a share , a year earlier . 
The Los Angeles media concern said that the year-ago period included a $ 26.5 million gain from the sale of assets , primarily timberlands . 
Revenue was $ 873.9 million , up 7.3 % from $ 814.8 million . 
Stronger results from the company 's broadcast and cable television units and professional and textbook publishing divisions , plus increased advertising at the company 's largest newspaper , the Los Angeles Times , offset advertising declines in the company 's newspapers in the Eastern U.S. , the company said . 
`` Looking ahead to the fourth quarter , the outlook for the newspaper group remains guarded , with no improvement yet seen in operating trends in our Eastern markets , '' said Robert F. Erburu , Times Mirror 's chairman and chief executive . 
Copper futures sold off sharply yesterday , influenced by declines in the stock market and dollar , and a rally in bonds . 
December copper opened near Monday 's close , tried to rally but failed , and then triggered stop-loss orders on its way down to settle at $ 1.1510 a pound , off 4.50 cents for the day . 
Stop-loss orders are placed previously with instructions to execute them if the market hits a predetermined price . 
William Kaiser , president of the Kaiser Financial Group in Chicago , said the decline was almost certainly influenced by the early sell-off in the stock market , which partly reflected a weakening economy . 
He said the recent decline in copper stocks was misleading in the face of a slowdown in manufacturing . 
Mr. Kaiser said traders could have picked up signals of an imminent price decline had they been watching the scrap metal markets , which became noticeably weaker two to three weeks ago . 
But though a weakening economy implies reduced demand , Mr. Kaiser said that Third World copper-producing countries have n't any choice but to sell copper . 
They might even step up sales in a falling market , he said , in an effort to maintain the flow of foreign exchange into their treasuries . 
Technically , Mr. Kaiser noted that a lot of traders had bought into the market when the price was in the $ 1.24 to $ 1.26 range , thinking there was support at the $ 1.20 level . 
When the market fell below that level on Monday and then yesterday could n't climb above that level , traders started selling out their positions . 
Betty Raptopoulos , senior metals analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities in New York , agreed that most of the selling was of a technical nature . 
She said the market hit the $ 1.18 level at around 10 a.m. EDT where it encountered a large number of stop-loss orders . 
More stop-loss orders were touched off all the way down to below $ 1.14 , where modest buying was attracted . 
Ms. Raptopoulos said the settling of strikes in Canada and Mexico will have little effect on supplies of copper until early next year . 
She thinks the next area of support for copper is in the $ 1.09 to $ 1.10 range . 
`` I believe that as soon as the selling abates somewhat we could see a rally back to the $ 1.20 region , '' she added . 
She thinks a recovery in the stock market would help copper rebound as well . 
She noted that the preliminary estimate of the third-quarter gross national product is due out tomorrow and is expected to be up about 2.5 % to 3 % . 
`` If the number is a little better , then copper will respond positively , if it is worse then more selling could ensue , '' she predicted . 
Ms. Raptopoulos noted that relating economic numbers to specific market activity is tricky . 
Yesterday , for example , `` the durable goods numbers came out for September and the number was down only 0.1 % , '' she said . 
`` However , if you exclude defense-related orders then durable goods were down 3.9 % . 
I believe that number reflects a slowing economy . '' 
She said copper traders will also be looking toward the release of the index of leading economic indicators next Tuesday . 
However , David Threlkeld , president of Threlkeld & Co. , an international metals company , noted that so far this year copper consumption is way ahead of the same period of 1988 , and that projected production is below last year . 
Mr. Threlkeld said the copper market seems to be anticipating a recession in three months , with declining use being the result . 
`` But , '' he added , `` we have had that exact same perception six times in the last six years . '' 
He noted that currently the ratio of available copper to consumption is about 3.5 weeks . 
He said the normal ratio is five to six weeks . 
According to Mr. Threlkeld , the bottleneck in copper production is n't at the mines but at the copper refineries . 
`` It takes three months to turn copper concentrate into cathodes , '' he said . 
If there is n't a recession , he said , `` we will be out of copper by the end of March . 
If there is a recession that will change the statistical situation . '' 
He thinks that without a recession copper prices could exceed a high of $ 1.65 a pound , which was reached last year . 
In the past Mr. Threlkeld has been known to have substantial long positions that is , he had bought copper futures in anticipation of rising prices -- in the copper futures market . 
In other commodity markets yesterday : 
ENERGY : The attitude was `` wait-and-see '' in crude oil futures yesterday in trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange . 
Prices for the U.S. benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude remained locked in a fairly narrow range before ending the session four cents lower at $ 19.72 a barrel for December delivery . 
Several analysts and brokers said the petroleum market was ready to rally after two days of price declines from profit-taking . 
But an early 80-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average stopped the crude rally cold . 
The industrial average recovered to close only 3.69 points lower , but petroleum futures never shook off the chill . 
Most market participants said they were looking to this week 's inventory statistics from the American Petroleum Institute to give the market some direction . 
The report is n't generally available until late on Tuesdays . 
PRECIOUS METALS : Futures prices inched upward in mostly lackluster trading . 
December gold was up $ 3.20 an ounce at $ 373.40 ; December silver gained 5.7 cents to $ 5.1950 an ounce . 
January platinum rose $ 2.30 an ounce to $ 488.60 . 
Mr. Kaiser said there were no fundamental factors moving these markets . 
He noted that two weeks ago there were rumors of Soviet sales of precious metals to finance grain purchases , but the sales do n't seem to have materialized . 
Ms. Raptopoulos thought yesterday 's price action reflected weakness in the stock market and the dollar . 
`` Gold still acts as a haven when uncertainty prevails in the financial markets as it did '' yesterday , she said . 
Mr. Kaiser noted that gold was more than 71 times the price of silver at the close yesterday , which is historically high . 
`` The high ratio reflects the fact that silver is still regarded as about a half-industrial metal and its price lagging relative to gold says that traders are expecting a weakening economy , '' he said . 
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS : Prices closed lower after trading in relatively narrow ranges because of strong selling in the cash market and continued favorable harvest weather . 
The sale to the Chinese government of 330,000 metric tons of wheat under the government 's export enhancement program was announced after the close of trading Monday , but the sale was expected and failed to buoy prices yesterday , said Dale Gustafson , a futures analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in Chicago . 
As for other export customers , the Soviet Union is n't expected to be back buying U.S. corn in significant amounts until early next year , he said . 
A number of commercial grain users buttressed that opinion yesterday by buying certain corn options for delivery in March , indicating to analysts that the commercial companies would use the options to hedge against expected corn sales in next year 's first quarter . 
COCOA : Futures at first continued the rally begun on Monday , but then faltered and closed lower . 
The December contract opened just under Monday 's close , triggered some previously placed buy orders just above $ 1,030 a metric ton , pushing the price to $ 1,040 , and then encountered heavy selling by traders who buy and sell for their own accounts and by commercial interests . 
The contract settled at $ 1,014 a ton , off $ 13 . 
Robert Hafer , senior commodities analyst at Kaiser Financial Group , said Monday 's rally continued yesterday for only about 20 minutes after the opening . 
He said even though there was arbitrage buying in New York because of the weak dollar , cocoa fell to relentless pressure from bearish traders . 
But he noted that speculators apparently do n't believe there is much more of a decline in store for cocoa . 
The December contract reached its life-of-contract low of $ 975 a ton on Oct. 11 ; its lifetime high was $ 1,735 , set in 1988 , and its recent high was $ 1,368 , set in early August . 
The last time cocoa traded at prices as low as currently was in 1974 . 
But while further modest declines might be ahead , Mr. Hafer said it would be difficult to get through resistance levels just above yesterday 's high . 
Citizens First Bancorp . Inc. said it agreed to buy Lakeland First Financial Group Inc. , a Succasunna , N.J. , bank holding company , for about $ 50.6 million in cash and stock . 
Citizens First , which controls Citizens First National Bank and is based in Glen Rock , N.J. , will pay a maximum of 40 % in cash for the parent of Lakeland Savings Bank and the remainder in convertible preferred stock , with a liquidation value of $ 18 a share . 
Lakeland holders will have the option to request either stock or cash . 
The convertible preferred will pay dividends at 7.875 % and be convertible into shares of Citizens First at a rate equal to 20 % above the average closing price of the stock during a 20-day period prior to the transaction 's completion . 
The deal requires regulatory and shareholder approval . 
Color Systems Technology Inc. , Los Angeles , said its major creditor , General Electric Pension Trust , agreed to convert $ 11.8 million of debt owed into 25 % of Color System 's fully diluted common stock . 
The agreement also calls for General Electric Pension , a unit of General Electric Co. , to receive as much as 10 % of Color Systems ' fully diluted common stock , depending on the proceeds from the sale of the AEI Film Library and its receivables . 
General Electric Pension took control of the 85-title library last month after Color Systems defaulted on the loan . 
The agreement depends on Color Systems ' ability to win similar concessions from other creditors . 
Buddy Young , president , said the company expects to conclude negotiations with other creditors within 60 days . 
Color Systems , which converts black-and-white film to color videotape , posted a loss of $ 7.1 million , or $ 1.32 a share , on revenue of $ 10.6 million for the fiscal year ended June 30 . 
Its stock fell 12.5 cents , to $ 2.125 , in American Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday . 
Next to Kohlberg Kravis Roberts 's megabillion RJR Nabisco deal , SCI Television is small fry . 
But the troubles of SCI TV are a classic tale of the leveraged buy-out excesses of the 1980s , especially the asset-stripping game . 
SCI TV , which expects to release a plan to restructure $ 1.3 billion of debt in the next day or so , is n't just another LBO that went bad after piling on debt -- though it did do that . 
The cable and TV station company was an LBO of an LBO , a set of assets that were leveraged twice , enabling the blue-chip buy-out king Henry Kravis in 1987 to take more than $ 1 billion of cash out of the com - pany . 
SCI TV 's buy-out was an ace in the hole for Mr. Kravis and for investors in KKR partnerships . 
But it has left holders of SCI TV 's junk bonds holding the bag , including some heavyweights that KKR might need to finance future deals , such as Kemper Financial Services , First Executive , Columbia Savings & Loan and Prudential Insurance Co. of America . 
Some junk-holders are said to be considering legal action against KKR or moves to force SCI TV into bankruptcy court . 
And KKR 's majority partner in SCI TV 's buy-out , Nashville , Tenn. , entrepreneur George Gillett , also is said to be very unhappy . 
SCI TV 's six stations once were part of Storer Communications . 
KKR loaded up the cable and television company with debt in an 1985 buy-out , then later sold Storer 's cable operations at a fat profit . 
In 1987 , KKR for the second time piled debt onto Storer 's TV stations , selling them for $ 1.3 billion to a new entity that was 45%-owned by KKR and 55%-owned by Gillett Corp. , which now operates the SCI TV stations . 
In this second LBO , KKR with one hand took more than $ 1 billion of cash out of the TV company 's assets and moved it into the Storer cable operations , making them more valuable in a 1988 sale . 
( Storer also took $ 125 million of junior SCI TV bonds as partial payment for the TV assets . ) 
With the other hand , KKR put back into SCI TV less than 10 % of the cash it had taken out , buying SCI TV common and preferred shares . 
So , while KKR today has an estimated $ 250 million sunk in now-shaky SCI TV , including equity and debt , the LBO firm still is $ 1 billion ahead on the SCI TV buy-out after taking cash up front . 
On Storer as a whole , KKR racked up compound annual returns of 60 % in the three years it owned Storer . 
Meanwhile , Mr. Gillett risks losing his entire equity investment of about $ 100 million in SCI TV if the company ca n't be restructured . 
Overall , Mr. Gillett 's holding company , Gillett Holdings , is heavily indebted and , except for its Vail Mountain resorts , is n't doing very well . 
With the TV business falling on hard times in recent years , analysts say that if SCI TV had to be liquidated today , it might fetch 30 % less than in the 1987 buy-out , wiping out most of the company 's junk-holders and its stockholders . 
Meanwhile , SCI TV can barely pay its cash interest bill , and to stay out of bankruptcy court it must soon reschedule a lot of bank loans and junk bonds that have fallen due . 
SCI TV 's grace period for paying its bills is due to expire Nov. 16 . 
It now is quietly circulating among creditors a preliminary plan to restructure debt . 
Negotiations `` have started con - structively , but that 's not to say we like this particular offer , '' says Wilbur Ross of Rothschild Inc. , adviser to SCI TV junk-holders . 
No major player in the SCI TV deal will talk publicly . 
But it 's understood that Mr. Kravis is disappointed that Mr. Gillett did n't manage to boost SCI TV 's operating profit after the buy-out . 
Mr. Kravis apparently thinks SCI TV can survive if lenders extend its debt payments until TV stations rise in value again , allowing SCI TV to sell assets to pay debt . 
Mr. Gillett is said to be proud of his operating record ; he has lifted some stations ' ratings and turned around a Detroit station . 
As for junk-holders , they 're discovering it can be a mistake to take the other side of a trade by KKR . 
The bonds of SCI TV now are being quoted at prices ranging from only five cents to about 60 cents on the dollar , according to R.D. Smith & Co. in New York , which trades distressed securities . 
People who have seen SCI TV 's restructuring plan say it offers concessions by KKR and Gillett Corp . 
They would both give part of their combined $ 50 million in common equity in SCI TV to holders of SCI TV 's $ 488 million of junk bonds , as a carrot to persuade them to accept new bonds that might reduce the value of their claims on the company . 
But some militant SCI TV junk-holders say that 's not enough . 
They contend that SCI TV 's equity now is worthless . 
They add that it is n't costing KKR anything to give up equity because of its big up-front cash profit on the buy-out , which they think contributed to SCI TV 's current problems . 
Kemper , the biggest holder of senior SCI TV bonds , has refused to join the bond-holders committee and is said to be reviewing its legal options . 
To protect their claims , some junk-holders want KKR and perhaps Mr. Gillett to invest new money in SCI TV , perhaps $ 50 million or more . 
One investment banker who is n't involved in the deal says SCI TV needs at least $ 50 million of new equity to survive . 
Junk-holders say they have a stick to beat KKR with : `` The threat of bankruptcy is a legitimate tool '' to extract money from KKR , says one big SCI TV holder . 
This could be the first major bankruptcy-law proceeding for KKR , he adds . 
A big bankruptcy-court case might tarnish KKR 's name , and provide new fuel for critics of LBOs in Washington and elsewhere . 
But others say junk-holders have nothing to gain by putting SCI TV into bankruptcy-law proceedings . 
While KKR does n't control SCI TV which is unusual for a KKR investment -- it clearly has much deeper pockets than Mr. Gillett . 
Bankruptcy specialists say Mr. Kravis set a precedent for putting new money in sour LBOs recently when KKR restructured foundering Seaman Furniture , doubling KKR 's equity stake . 
But with Seaman , KKR was only trying to salvage its original investment , says bankruptcy investor James Rubin of Sass Lamle Rubin in New York . 
By contrast , KKR probably has already made all the money it can on SCI TV . 
And people who know Mr. Kravis say he is n't in a hurry to pour more money into SCI TV . 
Rubbermaid Inc. , reflecting strong earnings growth , boosted its quarterly dividend 18 % , to 13 cents a share from 11 cents . 
The maker of household products said the new dividend is payable Dec. 1 to shares of record Nov. 10 . 
Separately , the company 's board adopted a proposal to amend its 1986 shareholder rights plan , further insulating the company from takeover . 
Rubbermaid officials said they are n't aware of any effort to take over the company , but believed the shareholder plan needed to be strengthened . 
`` The board has stated repeatedly that Rubbermaid should be independent , '' said Walter W. Williams , Rubbermaid president . 
Some changes to the plan were minor adjustments , but the most significant was an amendment that provides that if any investor holds 25 % or more of Rubbermaid 's voting securities , each right held by others would entitle the holder to buy Rubbermaid shares with a market value of twice the right 's exercise price . 
Mr. Williams said the exercise price is $ 125 , meaning holders would have the right to buy $ 250 of Rubbermaid stock for half price , diluting the investor 's 25 % stake . 
For the third quarter , Rubbermaid earned $ 32.6 million , or 44 cents a share , up 16 % from $ 28.1 million , or 38 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales rose 9.7 % to $ 351.5 million from $ 320.4 million . 
Rubbermaid shares closed yesterday at $ 33.875 , off 12.5 cents , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
The stock market went on a dizzying ride as UAL , parent of United Airlines , once again led shares into a breathtaking decline and then an afternoon comeback . 
At the end of it all , the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed down 3.69 to 2659.22 . 
At one point yesterday morning , the Dow was down 80.53 points . 
New York Stock Exchange volume was 237,960,000 shares . 
Declining issues swamped advancers , 1,222 to 382 . 
Yesterday 's sell-off and rebound was a powerful reminder that 11 days after the 190-point plunge on Friday the 13th , the stock market still has a bad case of nerves . 
Takeover stock speculation and futures-related program trading drove the industrial average through wide ranges . 
And there is more volatility to come . 
`` October 13th left us with a cut and exposed nerve , '' said Jack Solomon , technical analyst for Bear Stearns . 
`` People are fearful and sensitive . 
Everybody 's finger is one inch closer to the button . 
I have never had as many calls as I had this morning . 
Volatility is here to stay . '' 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged about 80 points in slightly more than one hour after the opening bell . 
For many , it began to look like a replay of Oct. 13 . 
As stocks and stock-index futures fell , a trading limit was hit in the S&P 500 stock futures pit . 
Under a post-1987 crash reform , the Chicago Mercantile Exchange would n't permit the December S&P futures to fall further than 12 points for a half hour . 
That caused a brief period of panic selling of stocks on the Big Board . 
But at a critical moment , stock-index arbitrage traders showed their power and control . 
They scooped up hundreds of S&P futures when the market needed it most . 
At about 10:40 a.m. EDT , several big buy orders hit the S&P pit simultaneously , lifting the futures up out of the trading limit and eventually into ranges that caused computer-driven program buying of stocks . 
`` It is very clear that those buy orders came from people who wanted their franchise protected , '' said one Chicago-based futures trader . 
`` These guys wanted to do something to show how powerful they are . '' 
Traders said Goldman Sachs , Shearson Lehman Hutton and Salomon Brothers were the main force behind the futures buying at the pivotal moment . 
Shearson Lehman Hutton declined to comment . 
Officials at Goldman Sachs and Salomon Brothers were unavailable for comment . 
As in the Oct. 13 massacre , yesterday morning 's drop was triggered by bad news for speculators in UAL . 
A UAL statement after the market closed Monday indicated that the airline 's board wanted to keep the company independent , effectively crushing hopes of an immediate buy-out . 
Five minutes before the Big Board opened , a preliminary price was flashed for UAL -- somewhere between 135 and 155 , a loss of as much as $ 43 a share from Monday 's close . 
UAL finally opened for trading at 10:08 a.m. at 150 , down $ 28 . 
Floor traders said there was a huge crowd around the Big Board specialist 's post where UAL trades . 
`` There was a seething mass of people , '' said one floor trader . 
`` Then there was a big liquidation of stock '' across the board , he added . 
Takeover speculators -- who have already taken a record loss estimated at more than $ 700 million on UAL -- started selling other stocks as well as S&P futures in an attempt to hedge against a further UAL blood bath . 
Shortly after the UAL opening , program traders started selling stocks in the Major Market Index and S&P 500 index . 
The 20-stock MMI mimics the Dow Jones Industrial Average . 
By 10:30 a.m. the Dow was down 62.70 . 
All 20-stocks in the MMI except Exxon , General Motors and Sears were down $ 1 to $ 2 . 
At 10:33 , when the S&P 500 December futures contract crunched to a 12-point loss under the force of sell programs , S&P futures trading was halted and program trades on the Big Board were routed into a special computer that scans for order imbalances . 
Under the rules adopted by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange , the futures contract can not drop below the limit , but buyers can purchase futures . 
At this point , the Dow industrials were down 75.41 points and falling . 
The trading halt in the S&P 500 futures exacerbated selling and confusion , many traders maintain . 
But as the fright began to spread through the S&P pit , the big brokerage firms came in and bought futures aggressively . 
`` It was whooosh ! '' said one futures trader . 
In five minutes , the Dow industrials climbed almost 30 points . 
The big futures buying triggered stock-index buy programs that eventually trimmed the Dow 's loss to 31 points by 11 a.m . 
Traders said the futures buying was finely calculated by program traders . 
These firms sold stock into the big morning decline , but seeing the velocity of the market 's drop , held back on their offsetting purchases of futures until the S&P futures hit the trading limit . 
Then they completed the other side of the trade by buying futures , which abruptly halted the stock market 's decline as traders began to buy stocks . 
From then on , the Dow industrials held at a loss of 40 to 50 points . 
Then , in late-afternoon trading , hundred-thousand-share buy orders for UAL hit the market , including a 200,000-share order through Bear Stearns that seemed to spark UAL 's late price surge . 
Almost simultaneously , PaineWebber began a very visible buy program for dozens of stocks . 
The combined buying rallied the Dow into a small gain , before closing at a slight loss . 
Some institutional traders loved the wild ride . 
`` This is fun , '' asserted Susan Del Signore , head equity trader at Travelers Investment Management Co . 
She said she used the market 's wild swings to buy shares cheaply on the sell-off . 
On the comeback , Ms. Del Signore unloaded shares she has been aiming to get rid of . 
But traders who risk money handling big blocks of stock were shaken . 
`` This market is eating away my youth , '' said Chung Lew , head equity trader at Kleinwort Benson North America Inc . 
`` Credibility sounds intangible . 
But I think we are losing credibility because when the market does this , it does n't present itself as a rational investment . 
But if you overlook all this , it is a beautiful market for investment still . '' 
Traders attributed rallies in a number of stocks to a Japanese buy program that PaineWebber carried out as part of a shift in portfolio strategy , according to Dow Jones Professional Investor Report . 
Dow Jones climbed 5 3\/4 to 41 on very heavy volume of 786,100 shares . 
Analysts said a big Japanese buy order was behind the rise . 
A Dow Jones spokesman said there were no corporate developments that would account for the activity . 
Other issues said to be included in the buy program were Procter & Gamble , which rose 2 7\/8 to 133 1\/2 ; Atlantic Richfield , which gained 2 to 103 3\/4 , and Rockwell International , which jumped 2 3\/4 to 27 1\/8 . 
PaineWebber declined to comment . 
UAL finished at 170 , off 8 3\/8 . 
Other airline stocks fell in response to the UAL board 's decision to remain independent for now , including USAir Group , which separately reported a third-quarter loss of $ 1.86 a share compared with a year-ago profit . 
USAir fell 2 1\/2 to 40 . 
AMR , the parent of American Airlines , fell 1 3\/4 to 68 7\/8 on 2.3 million shares ; Delta Air Lines lost 1 1\/2 to 66 , Southwest Airlines slid 3\/4 to 24 1\/4 and Midway Airlines dropped 1\/4 to 14 7\/8 . 
Texas Air , which owns Continental and Eastern airlines , lost 3\/8 to 13 1\/8 on the American Stock Exchange . 
Metals stocks also were especially weak , as concerns about the earnings outlook for cyclical companies weighed on the group . 
Aluminum Co. of America dropped 1 1\/2 to 70 1\/4 , Phelps Dodge fell 4 to 59 7\/8 , Asarco lost 1 3\/8 to 31 3\/4 , Reynolds Metals slid 1 3\/8 to 50 3\/8 , Amax dropped 1 1\/8 to 21 5\/8 and Cyprus Minerals skidded 2 to 26 3\/4 . 
Alcan Aluminium was an exception , as it gained 1 3\/8 to 23 on two million shares . 
Goodyear Tire & Rubber tumbled 2 7\/8 to 43 7\/8 . 
Its third-quarter earnings were higher than a year ago , but fell short of expectations . 
Other stocks in the Dow industrials that failed to benefit from the market 's rebound included United Technologies , which dropped 1 to 53 5\/8 , and Bethle hem Steel , which fell 1 to 16 7\/8 . 
BankAmerica dropped 1 1\/4 to 29 1\/2 on 2.3 million shares amid rumors that the earthquake last week in the San Francisco area had caused structural damage to its headquarters building . 
The company denied the rumors and noted that it does n't own the building . 
Stocks of California-based thrifts also were hard hit . 
Great Western Financial lost 1 1\/8 to 20 1\/2 on 1.6 million shares , Golden West Financial dropped 1 1\/4 to 28 1\/2 and H.F. Ahmanson dipped 5\/8 to 21 1\/4 . 
HomeFed plunged 3 5\/8 to 38 1\/2 ; its third-quarter earnings were down from a year ago . 
Golden Valley Microwave Foods skidded 3 5\/8 to 31 3\/4 after warning that its fourth-quarter results could be hurt by `` some fairly large international marketing expenses . '' 
Dividend-related trading swelled volume in two issues : Security Pacific , which fell 7\/8 to 44 1\/2 and led the Big Board 's most actives list on composite volume of 14.8 million shares , and Nipsco Industries , which lost 3\/8 to 17 3\/8 on 4.4 million shares . 
Both stocks have dividend yields of about 5 % and will go ex-dividend Wednesday . 
Kellogg surged 4 1\/4 to 75 . 
Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette placed the stock on its list of recommended issues . 
The company noted that its third-quarter results should be released later this week or early next week . 
Vista Chemical rose 1 3\/8 to 38 5\/8 after Bear Stearns added the stock to the firm 's buy list , citing recent price weakness . 
Georgia Gulf , another producer of commodity chemicals , advanced 2 to 49 1\/2 ; Dallas investor Harold Simmons , who holds about 10 % of its shares , said he has n't raised his stake . 
Norfolk Southern went up 1 1\/8 to 37 7\/8 . 
The company 's board approved the repurchase of up to 45 million common shares , or about 26 % of its shares outstanding , through the end of 1992 . 
Airborne Freight climbed 1 1\/8 to 38 1\/2 . 
Its third-quarter earnings more than doubled from a year earlier and exceeded analysts ' expectations . 
John Harland , which will replace American Medical International on the S&P 500 following Wednesday 's close , gained 5\/8 to 24 1\/8 . 
The Amex Market Value Index fell 3.10 to 376.36 . 
Volume totaled 14,560,000 shares . 
GANNETT Co. raised its quarterly dividend 11 % to 30 cents a share from 27 cents , payable Jan. 2 , 1990 , to shares of record Dec. 8 , 1989 . 
The action increases the annual dividend to $ 1.20 a share from $ 1.08 . 
This is the 22nd year in which the Washington media company has increased dividends . 
Gannett 's third-quarter earnings rose 11 % to 52 cents a share from 47 cents in the year-ago period . 
Sales rose 2.9 % to $ 827.9 million from $ 804.3 million . 
Gannett has 161 million shares outstanding . 
Fireman 's Fund Corp. said third-quarter net income plunged 85 % to $ 7.2 million from last year 's $ 49.1 million , or 99 cents a share , because of ravages of Hurricane Hugo and increased reserves for legal expenses . 
Payout of preferred dividends resulted in a net loss of five cents a share in the most recent quarter . 
Revenue edged up 3.4 % to $ 904 million from $ 874 million in last year 's third quarter . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Fireman 's closed at $ 35.50 a share , down 50 cents . 
Impact of the Oct. 17 San Francisco earthquake , which will be recorded in the fourth quarter , is n't expected to exceed $ 50 million after taxes , the company added . 
For the nine months , the insurance company said net fell 46 % to $ 88.8 million , or $ 1.54 a share , from $ 164 million , or $ 3.16 a share , the previous year . 
Revenue slid 7 % to $ 2.6 billion from $ 2.8 billion a year earlier . 
Fireman 's Fund property-liability subsidiaries reported a 120.7 % combined underwriting ratio for the nine months , up from 108.4 % for the year-ago period . 
Hurricane Hugo accounted for about $ 36 million in pretax third-quarter losses , net of reinsurance recoveries . 
The company said there was an additional increase in loss and loss-expense reserves of $ 71 million reflecting `` higher than expected '' development in claims legal expenses from to prior periods . 
For the third quarter , net premiums were $ 742 million , up 9.6 % from $ 677 million in last year 's quarter , because of the expiration of the National Indemnity quota share reinsurance agreement . 
Net premiums written through Sept. 30 fell 5 % to $ 2.1 billion from $ 2.2 billion a year ago , because of the writing of fewer policies at flat prices , the company said . 
Third-quarter and nine-month results do n't include any provision for premium returns that could be ordered by the California Department of Insurance under Proposition 103 . 
Fireman 's Fund said it has applied for an exemption from these rate rollbacks , and plans to defend its filing in hearings before the department . 
CONTROL DATA Corp. said it is offering to purchase the $ 154.2 million amount of its 12 3\/4 % senior notes due June 15 , 1991 , at par , plus accrued interest to the Dec. 8 purchase date . 
The Minneapolis computer systems and services concern said the offer is required under the senior note indenture as a result of Control Data 's recent sale of its disk drive subsidiary , Imprimis , to Seagate Technology Inc . 
Child 's Game 
There was very slow play on the market today , They were selling and buying by halves ; Instead of trading like Bears and Bulls , They behaved like cubs and calves . 
-- George O. Ludcke . 
Politrick 
I 've learned one thing from candidates , A technique so deftly done : If a question ca n't be answered , Strongly answer an unasked one ! 
-- Mimi Kay . 
Foresight 
We need to get a space platform set up soon -- just in case we want to step out for a breath of fresh air . 
-- Ivern Ball . 
After being whipsawed by a volatile stock market , Treasury bonds closed higher . 
But junk bonds took more hits . 
Early in the day , bond dealers said trading volume was heavy as large institutional investors scrambled to buy long-term Treasury bonds on speculation that the stock market 's volatility would lead to a `` flight-to-quality '' rally . 
That happens when nervous stock investors dump equities and buy Treasurys , which are higher in quality and thus considered safe . 
`` Some retail accounts , such as commercial banks and pension funds , wanted to get on the bandwagon before it was too late , '' said Sung Won Sohn , chief economist at Norwest Corp. , Minneapolis . 
At one point , the Dow Jones Industrial average fell about 80 points on news that UAL Corp. decided to remain independent . 
In response , Treasury prices soared 1 1\/8 points , or about $ 11.25 for each $ 1,000 face amount . 
But the gains in Treasury bonds were pared as stocks staged a partial recovery . 
The industrial average ended at 2659.22 , down 3.69 points . 
Economists said the bond market 's strength also is a sign that investors expect the Federal Reserve to cut interest rates amid growing evidence that the economy is slowing . 
While they do n't expect the Fed to move right away , they say the case for lower rates is building . 
Yesterday , for example , the Commerce Department reported that new orders for durable goods fell 0.1 % , while the nation 's auto makers reported lackluster mid-October sales . 
The Treasury 's 30-year bond ended over 1\/4 point higher . 
Municipal , mortgage-backed and investment-grade corporate bonds rose 1\/8 to 1\/2 point . 
But high-yield , high-risk bonds fell 1\/4 to 1\/2 point with the stock market early in the session and never recovered . 
According to a trader at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. , the hardest hit junk bonds were those issued by RJR Holdings Capital Corp. , which are the easiest to sell . 
RJR 's 14.70 % bonds due 2007 fell 2 1\/2 points . 
Trading activity in the junk market was extremely light as dealers could n't find enough buyers to match sellers . 
`` While the stock market was falling , most { junk bond holders } were just watching it not knowing what to do , '' said Paul Suckow , director of fixed-income securities at Oppenheimer Management Corp . 
`` It was like driving down the highway watching a wreck . 
Everybody was rubber-necking . '' 
Adding to the junk market 's jitters were reports that Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. is having trouble structuring a $ 1.6 billion offering for TW Food Services Inc. and will postpone or even cancel the issue . 
TW is the largest franchisee of Hardee 's , a fast-food restaurant , and operates several other food chains . 
Donaldson Lufkin would n't comment . 
Credit analysts said investors are nervous about the issue because they say the company 's ability to meet debt payments is dependent on too many variables , including the sale of assets and the need to mortgage property to retire some existing debt . 
Also , the TW offering includes interest-deferred and pay-in-kind securities , which are currently unpopular . 
Meanwhile , investors turned a cold shoulder to the Treasury 's sale of $ 10 billion of new two-year notes yesterday . 
`` It 's not too surprising that the auction was sloppy , given the volatility in the bond market because of stocks , '' said Robert T. McGee , a senior vice president at Tokai Bank Ltd . 
`` People are looking past supply to lower interest rates , but they 're also worried about being whipsawed by the volatility in the stock market . '' 
The new two-year notes were priced with an average yield of 7.74 % . 
That was higher than the 7.71 % to 7.73 % average yield that traders had expected . 
In when-issued trading , the notes were quoted at a price to yield 7.78 % . 
Sluggish demand was also evidenced by the weak 2.41-to-1 bid-to-cover ratio , which was lower than the average 2.79-to-1 ratio at the last 12 similar auctions . 
The ratio , which reflects the number of bids the Treasury receives for each bid accepted , is used to gauge investor demand . 
Dealers said players shied away from the note sale because they were concerned that prices at the time of the auction might erode if the stock market staged a recovery , which , in fact , did happen . 
Individual and Japanese participation in the auction was disappointing , according to dealers . 
`` Interest by Japanese investors was limited , '' said Michael Moran , chief economist at Daiwa Securities America Inc . 
`` They are typically not active in two-year note auctions , but today 's participation could be viewed as lighter-than-normal . '' 
However , Mr. Moran added that the Japanese generally have a positive view of the U.S. bond market because of expectations that the dollar will remain strong and interest rates will decline . 
He said , `` Possibly , they 're waiting to buy at the ( quarterly ) refunding '' of government debt to be held next month by the Treasury . 
A trader at a Japanese firm estimated that the Japanese purchased no more than 10 % of the two-year notes . 
Treasury , Agency Securities 
Today investors will focus on the long-awaited auction of $ 4.5 billion of 30-year bonds by Resolution Funding Corp . 
The initial bond offering by the new government agency , which was created to help rescue the nation 's troubled thrifts , is n't expected to see robust demand . 
A small yield premium over comparable Treasurys and a lack of liquidity is hampering dealers ' efforts to drum up interest in the so-called bailout bonds . 
In when-issued trading , the Refcorp bonds were quoted at a price to yield 8.17 % . 
Yesterday , the benchmark 30-year bond was quoted late at 102 18\/32 to yield 7.89 % , compared with 102 9\/32 to yield 7.93 % on Monday . 
The latest 10-year Treasury was quoted at 100 22\/32 to yield 7.88 % , compared with 100 17\/32 to yield 7.9 % . 
Short-term rates were unchanged to slightly lower . 
The discount rate on three-month Treasury bills was quoted at 7.52 % for a bond-equivalent yield of 7.75 % , while the rate on six-month Treasury bills was quoted at 7.47 % for a yield of 7.85 % . 
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value . 
Thus , higher bidding narrows the investor 's return while lower bidding widens it . 
Corporate Issues 
Several blue-chip companies tapped the new-issue market yesterday to take advantage of falling interest rates . 
Three of the largest offerings , by Exxon Capital Corp. , Xerox Corp. and Citicorp , were underwritten by groups led by Salomon Brothers Inc . 
Exxon Capital , long-rumored to be a potential debt issuer , offered $ 200 million of 10-year notes priced to yield 8.31 % . 
Citicorp issued $ 200 million of seven-year notes priced to yield 8.82 % , and Xerox priced $ 150 million of six-year notes to yield 8.85 % . 
Meanwhile , International Business Machines Corp. paved the way for a visit to the credit markets by filing a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for $ 800 million in new debt . 
This is in addition to IBM 's existing shelf registration under which $ 200 million in debt securities are available for issuance . 
In secondary trading , investment-grade corporate bonds ended 1\/8 to 1\/4 higher . 
Municipals 
Actively traded municipal bonds ended 1\/4 to 1\/2 point higher in brisk trading , despite a flood of new supply . 
New Jersey Turnpike Authority 's 7.20 % issue of 2018 finished 1\/4 point stronger at 98 1\/2 bid , to yield 7.32 % . 
Traders said municipals were underpinned by influences including the climb in Treasury issue prices . 
Also , municipal bonds lured buying because the stock market remains wobbly , traders contended . 
Mainly , though , it was a favorable outlook for yesterday 's new supply that propped up municipals , some traders said . 
Among the new issues was Massachusetts 's $ 230 million of general obligation bonds . 
The bonds were won by a Goldman , Sachs & Co. group with a true interest cost of 7.17 % . 
They were priced to yield from 6.00 % in 1990 to 7.20 % in 2009 . 
The Massachusetts deal had an unsold balance of $ 84.3 million in late trading , the underwriter said . 
Mortgage - , Asset-Backed Securities 
Mortgage securities gained 3\/32 to 9\/32 point after a hectic session , with Government National Mortgage Association 8 % securities as the standout issue . 
The Ginnie Mae issue rose amid talk of large purchases of the securities by institutional investors . 
The derivative markets remained active as one new issue was priced and talk circulated about more offerings in the next day or two . 
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. issued a $ 500 million real estate mortgage investment conduit backed by its 8 1\/2 % securities . 
In the asset-backed market , a big offering of Ford Motor Credit Corp . auto-loan securities was increased in size after strong institutional demand . 
The deal by the Ford Motor Co. unit , priced Monday , was increased to $ 3.05 billion from $ 2.58 billion . 
Among major pass-through issues , Ginnie Mae 9 % securities for November delivery ended at 98 15\/32 , up 5\/32 , after touching an early high of 98 27\/32 ; 8 % securities were at 94 5\/32 , up 9\/32 ; 9 1\/2 % securities at 100 15\/32 , up 4\/32 ; and 10 % securities at 102 11\/32 , up 3\/32 . 
Freddie Mac 9 % securities were at 97 21\/32 , up 5\/32 . 
The Ginnie Mae 9 % issue was yielding 9.34 % to a 12-year average life assumption , as the spread above the Treasury 10-year note held at 1.46 percentage points . 
Foreign Bonds 
The Eurodollar bond market sprang to life late in the European trading session after the Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbled . 
Eurodollar bonds are often issued by foreign corporations , but interest and principal are paid in dollars . 
The bonds ended about 1\/2 point higher yesterday . 
Prices of European government bonds also rose as U.S. stocks declined . 
West Germany 's 7 % issue due October 1999 rose 0.13 point to 99.93 to yield 7.01 % , while the 6 3\/4 % issue due July 1994 rose 0.05 to 97.70 to yield 7.33 % . 
Britain 's 11 3\/4 % Treasury bond due 2003\/2007 rose 17\/32 to 112 6\/32 to yield 10.05 % , while the 12 % notes due 1995 rose 11\/32 to 104 2\/32 to yield 10.93 % . 
In Japan , government bond prices fell . 
The No. 111 4.6 % bond due 1998 ended on brokers ' screens at 95.22 , down 0.17 point , to yield 5.41 % . 
BSB BANCORP Inc. , Binghamton , N.Y. , said it increased its regular quarterly dividend 50 % , to 15 cents a share from 10 cents . 
It is payable Dec. 10 to stock of record Nov. 24 . 
The move was made because of the bank-holding company 's increased profitability , officials said . 
In the third quarter , BSB earned $ 2 million , up from $ 1.8 million a year earlier . 
In national over-the-counter trading yesterday , BSB closed at $ 17.50 , up 12.5 cents . 
BSB has 3.1 million shares outstanding . 
Staar Surgical Co. 's board said that it has removed Thomas R. Waggoner as president and chief executive officer and that John R. Wolf , formerly executive vice president , sales and marketing , has been named president and chief executive officer . 
Mr. Waggoner has been involved in a dispute with the board since August , when he ousted all the directors . 
Later they said they fired him , and two directors attempted to place the company under bankruptcy-law protection . 
A federal judge turned down the Chapter 11 petition . 
The company 's latest announcement said Mr. Waggoner will remain a director of Staar , a maker of products for small-incision surgery . 
Mr. Wolf and other members of the board declined to comment on the announcement . 
Mr. Waggoner could n't be reached . 
The Staar board also said that John R. Ford resigned as a director , and that Mr. Wolf was named a member of the board . 
EAST GERMANY'S KRENZ WARNED against further pro-democracy protests . 
After the legislature confirmed him as the Communist Party leader , Krenz said demonstrations to demand democratic freedoms could cause a `` worsening of the situation , or confrontation . '' 
He also reaffirmed East Germany 's allegiance to Communist orthodoxy . 
But as many as 12,000 people marched in East Berlin after the speech to protest his election . 
During the balloting , 26 members of the 500-seat Parliament voted against Krenz , a move considered unprecedented in the country 's 40-year history . 
Officials in East Berlin , responding to complaints from opposition groups , admitted police used excessive force in dispersing protesters this month . 
The Iran-Contra judge agreed to allow Poindexter to subpoena the personal papers of ex-President Reagan , ruling that there was sufficient evidence that the data would be important to the defense . 
But the judge denied a request by the former national security adviser , who faces five criminal charges , to seek documents from Bush . 
San Francisco Bay area officials said nine people remain missing in the aftermath of last week 's earthquake . 
The death toll rose to 63 . 
The House , meanwhile , approved $ 2.85 billion to aid in the recovery from the temblor and from Hurricane Hugo as state legislators moved toward a temporary sales-tax increase . 
U.S. officials expressed skepticism over an Israeli effort to show the PLO continues to practice terrorism . 
Israel provided the State Department with a list of recent alleged terrorist incidents attributed to forces controlled by Arafat , but the U.S. said it was n't satisfied that the incidents constituted terrorism . 
TV evangelist Jim Bakker was sentenced to 45 years in prison and fined $ 500,000 for defrauding followers of his PTL ministry . 
Bakker , who was immediately taken into custody , was convicted Oct. 5 by a federal court jury in Charlotte , N.C. , of fraud and conspiracy for diverting more than $ 3.7 million of ministry funds for personal use . 
Lawmakers in Moscow voted to deny the Communist Party its 100 guaranteed seats in the Soviet Congress , meaning Gorbachev and other aides might have to face voters . 
In Warsaw , Shevardnadze held his first talks with the Solidarity-led government and vowed to maintain fuel supplies . 
Poland 's premier is to visit Moscow next month . 
The Arab League pledged an accord for a complete Syrian troop pullout from Lebanon , where about 70,000 people marched to the headquarters of Christian leader Aoun to support his rejection of a peace plan approved Sunday by Lebanon 's legislature . 
The plan lacked a withdrawal timetable . 
Pro-Iranian kidnappers renewed an offer to trade their captives in Lebanon for at least 15 Shiite Moslem comrades jailed in Kuwait . 
The statement by Islamic Jihad , which holds at least two U.S. hostages , was accompanied by a photograph of Associated Press correspondent Terry Anderson , longest held of 18 Western hostages . 
The Treasury Department said S&Ls reject blacks for mortgage loans twice as often as they reject whites . 
The department 's Office of Thrift Supervision said that does n't necessarily mean thrifts are biased , but conceded that it does n't have data about applicants to determine why blacks are rejected more often . 
Emergency crews searched through the charred rubble of a Phillips Petroleum Co. plastics plant near Pasadena , Texas , where a series of explosions Monday killed at least two people and injured 124 . 
Company officials said 22 workers were missing and presumed dead . 
Safety authorities did n't immediately know the cause of the blasts . 
NATO defense ministers opened a two-day meeting in Portugal to assess the alliance 's nuclear-weapons needs amid reduced East-West tensions . 
The ministers ordered a study on the strategic role of nuclear arms in Western Europe once Soviet conventional weapons are reduced in the East bloc . 
The Justice Department scrambled to play down the significance of revised guidelines concerning prosecutions under the federal racketeering law . 
The guidelines , which discourage prosecutors from seeking court orders seizing the assets of certain racketeering defendants prior to trial , were first disclosed this week . 
Died : S. Clark Beise , 91 , ex-president and chief executive officer of Bank of America NT&SA , Saturday , in Hillsboro , Calif . 
STOCK PRICES SWUNG wildly as the market reacted to an initial plunge by UAL shares , followed by a sharp rebound in the afternoon . 
The Dow Jones industrials , down over 80 points in the morning , closed off 3.69 , at 2659.22 . 
Bond prices surged in reaction to the sell-off in stocks , then eased slightly during the afternoon recovery . 
The dollar finished lower . 
UAL 's stock regained most of an early loss amid speculation one or more investors may challenge the airline 's decision to stay independent . 
The stock closed down $ 8.375 , at $ 170 , after plunging $ 33 , to $ 145 . 
Ford may seek all of Jaguar , setting the stage for a possible bidding war with GM . 
Jaguar has been discussing an alliance with GM , but Ford 's move may derail the talks . 
Car and truck sales slid 20.5 % in mid-October as U.S. manufacturers paid the price for heavy incentives earlier in the year . 
General Motors continued to be hardest hit . 
Durable goods orders slipped 0.1 % in September , reflecting weakening auto demand after a spurt of orders for new 1990 models . 
Excluding transportation items , orders rose 1.8 % . 
Norfolk Southern 's board approved a buy-back of up to 45 million shares , valued at over $ 1.7 billion . 
The repurchase , coupled with an earlier buyback , will reduce the firm 's shares outstanding by over 26 % . 
PS New Hampshire received a sweetened $ 2.25 billion offer from Northeast Utilities , likely spurring a new round of bidding for the utility . 
GE executives were accused by U.S. prosecutors of providing `` misleading and false '' data to the Pentagon in 1985 to cover up `` longstanding fraudulent '' billing practices . 
Texaco said profit rose 11 % in the quarter , partly due to a massive restructuring . 
Sun posted a gain . 
Mobil , Shell and Chevron had declines . 
Mobil is preparing to slash its work force in the U.S. , possibly as soon as next month , sources said . 
Sears posted a 16 % drop in third-quarter profit as U.S. retail operations recorded the first loss in over five years . 
The results show Sears is struggling to attract shoppers . 
Digital Equipment announced its first mainframe computers , targeting IBM 's largest market and heating up the industry 's biggest rivalry . 
Cray Research expects supercomputer sales to be flat next year , the latest in a series of negative announcements by the company . 
Short interest increased 6 % in the Nasdaq over-the-counter market for the month ended Oct. 13 . 
Salomon posted an unexpectedly big gain in quarterly earnings , aided by its securities trading and investment banking activities . 
Procter & Gamble 's profit surged 38 % in its latest fiscal quarter , aided by a gain from a legal settlement and continued growth overseas . 
Goodyear 's profit rose 11 % in the quarter , buoyed by improved operating results in its tire business . 
Markets -- 
Stocks : Volume 237,960,000 shares . 
Dow Jones industrials 2659.22 , off 3.69 ; transportation 1210.70 , off 25.96 ; utilities 215.04 , off 0.31 . 
Bonds : Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3425.22 , up 
Commodities : Dow Jones futures index 129.24 , off 0.25 ; spot index 130.76 , off 0.88 . 
Dollar : 141.45 yen , off 0.45 ; 1.8355 marks , off 0.0115 . 
Genetic Defect Spotted In 3-Day-Old Embryo 
RESEARCHERS diagnosed a genetic defect in a three-day-old mouse embryo in an experiment directly applicable to humans . 
Prenatal diagnosis of genetic defects as early as the sixth week of pregnancy is increasingly common today . 
But the mouse experiment at a Medical Research Council laboratory in London shows genetic defects can be detected three days after conception using a new American-developed gene-copying technique . 
The experiment , applicable to many genetic disorders , involved beta-thalassemia , a severe blood anemia resulting from a missing hemoglobin gene . 
It 's an inherited human disorder that 's been duplicated in mice . 
In the experiment , mice with the defective gene were mated . 
Three days later , before the new embryo had become implanted in the uterus , it was washed out of the mother mouse . 
The embryo had progressed only to a clump of eight identical cells . 
One cell was teased out , and its DNA extracted . 
Using the new technique developed by Cetus Corp. , called the polymerase chain reaction , the scientists rapidly made millions of copies of the section of DNA that ordinarily contains the hemoglobin gene , providing enough copies to test . 
A genetic probe showed the hemoglobin gene was missing , the researchers report in the medical journal Lancet . 
In the report , two molecular biologists suggest such embryo diagnosis can be used by couples at high risk of passing a genetic defect to a child . 
For example , infertile couples who have the woman 's eggs fertilized in the test tube usually have several eggs fertilized at a time . 
When the fertilized cells divide to eight cells , a single cell from each embryo can be tested for genetic defects . 
A healthy embryo can be picked for implantation and defective ones discarded . 
Or in other couples , the embryo could be temporarily taken out and tested three days after conception and returned if healthy , or discarded if not . 
Yeast Adapted to Make Gene-Spliced Drugs 
AN OIL COMPANY finds a sideline in the microscopic world of yeast . 
In the early 1970s , when the `` world food crisis '' was a major worry , Phillips Petroleum Co. , like several other big companies , began developing `` single-cell protein , '' edible protein made by microbes feeding on non-edible materials . 
Phillips found and improved a yeast , `` Pichia pastoris , '' which made protein from natural gas-derived alcohol . 
It also could convert glucose from farm wastes into edible protein . 
Single-cell protein never panned out , and most companies abandoned such research . 
But Phillips persisted , calling in scientists from the Salk Institute . 
They 've now adapted the yeast to making genetically engineered drugs . 
Like the bacteria used by genetic engineers , the yeast can take in human genes and churn out human proteins for medical use . 
But the yeast genetic apparatus is more like that of animals than the bacterial genetic apparatus . 
Thus , the proteins from the yeast are molecularly more like human proteins than those from bacteria . 
The oil company claims its yeast system also is better than bacteria at high-volume production of genetically engineered drugs . 
Chiron Corp. , an Emeryville , Calif. , biotechnology firm , is seeing if the Phillips yeast can be used to make its genetically engineered human proteins . 
Peeking Inside Arteries From Outside the Body 
VISUALIZING BLOOD vessels without poking catheters into the body may come out of research at AT&T Bell Laboratories . 
Strokes , heart attacks , leg pains ( intermittent claudication ) and other problems stem from clogging of the arteries by cholesterol-rich deposits . 
At present , doctors can see how badly an artery is clogged only by inserting a thin catheter into the artery and injecting a fluid that makes the arteries visible on X-rays . 
A non-invasive method is being researched by biophysicist Lynn Jelinski at the AT&T unit . 
It relies on the fact that certain atoms give off detectable signals when subjected to an intense magnetic field . 
It 's the same phenomenon used in the new MRI ( magnetic resonance imaging ) scanners being used in hospitals in place of X-ray scans . 
In the Bell Labs experiments , an MRI-type of machine , synchronized with the heartbeat via an electrocardiogram , rapidly flashes a magnetic field on and off as blood passes a certain point in a vessel . 
The rapidly flashing return signals from excited hydrogen atoms in the blood give a `` stop-motion '' movie of the blood-filled vessel , ( like the `` stop-motion '' seen in disco dancers when a strobe light is flashing ) . 
The scientists have experimented on the tiny neck arteries of rats . 
They 've been able to measure the minuscule movements of the artery wall as the beating heart raises and lowers the pressure of the flowing blood , a first for such tiny blood vessels , they report in Nature , a scientific journal . 
They now are experimenting with measuring blood flow . 
The ultimate hope is that the technique could identify diseased vessels . 
Odds and Ends 
TESTS ON 2,800-year-old mummies from Chile indicate ancient wood fires did n't produce dioxins or dibenzofurans , contradicting a theory the two pollutants today are coming from wood burning , General Electric Co. reports in Environmental Science & Technology magazine ... . 
Almost 40 % of schizophrenic men have an impaired sense of smell vs. fewer than 10 % of schizophrenic women , reports the American Journal of Psychiatry . 
The Justice Department said it filed a lawsuit seeking more than $ 7.7 million from a Meredith Corp. unit on charges that the company defrauded the government on a contract to provide relocation services for federal employees . 
The suit , filed in federal trial court in Des Moines , Iowa , where Meredith is based , alleges that the diversified media company 's relocation unit cheated the government by misrepresenting the value of government employees ' homes . 
The government contract required Meredith Relocation Corp. to purchase employees ' homes based on independent appraisals . 
The Justice Department alleges that the company `` engaged in various forms of misrepresentation '' with the goal of reducing the appraised value of employees ' homes . 
In the suit , the department seeks to recover $ 7.7 million in costs incurred when the government terminated its contract with Meredith Relocation and sought other contracts to replace it . 
The department also said it seeks `` three times the government 's damages , which are presently undetermined , plus penalties . '' 
Officials with Meredith did n't have any immediate comment on the suit . 
Lloyd 's of London said it plans to clamp down on the ability of underwriting syndicates to leave their annual accounts open beyond the customary three years . 
Underwriting syndicates at Lloyd 's , the world 's largest insurance market , generally do n't close their accounts for three years , to allow for the filing of claims and litigation . 
When such claims and litigation extend beyond the period , the syndicates can extend their accounting deadlines . 
Lloyd 's said there are currently 115 open account years involving 68 of the market 's roughly 360 syndicates . 
The open-year accounting practice `` is widely recognized within Lloyd 's as of serious concern '' to the 31,329 member investors , who underwrite insurance at Lloyd 's in return for premium and investment income , Lloyd 's said . 
The procedure causes `` great uncertainty '' because an investor ca n't be sure of his or her individual liability , Lloyd 's said . 
As a result , the insurance market plans new measures to restrict the ability of syndicate officials to leave years open . 
Lloyd 's said it expects to enact new rules mandating the changes by year end . 
Under the new rules , the officials will have to secure additional information and reports from actuaries , including an assessment of whether officials have acted reasonably . 
In addition , officials will have to get quotes for certain reinsurance contracts and obtain approvals from other syndicate directors . 
Computer Associates International Inc. reported earnings for the second quarter , ended Sept. 30 , plummeted 66 % , primarily because of the acquisition of Cullinet Software Inc . 
The nation 's largest software company earned $ 9.6 million , or five cents a share , compared with $ 28 million , or 16 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue rose 5 % to $ 282 million from $ 268.3 million . 
The drop in earnings had been anticipated by most Wall Street analysts , but the results were reported after the market closed . 
Computer Associates closed at $ 13.625 , down 25 cents , in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
Anthony Wang , president , attributed the drop to the disruption of the company 's business resulting from the prolonged process of acquiring Cullinet . 
The acquisition was completed in September . 
In August , the company warned investors that the acquisition was being delayed , and many customers were holding off on purchase decisions until the takeover was completed . 
The delays mainly affected sales of data base management products , a core area for both Computer Associates and Cullinet , as well as sales of other products as part of package sales . 
Residents of this city soon will be seeing ads urging them to visit `` Cleveland 's outdoor museum '' -- Lake View Cemetery . 
Despite such famous tenants as oil magnate John D. Rockefeller , Lake View Cemetery has fallen on hard times . 
So the inner-city burial ground is trying to resurrect itself with a television advertising campaign . 
The ads celebrate the achievements of some of Lake View 's residents . 
A spot honoring Bill White , the inventor of chewing gum , shows a woman trying to extricate her high-heeled shoe from a wad of gum . 
Another focuses on Charles Brush , the first person to light a city electrically . 
It shows a boy hurling rocks at a street lamp . 
Street lights , the ad points out , `` helped sharpen the arm of many a budding baseball player . '' 
Cemetery officials hope the ads , which will begin airing next month , will not only draw visitors but bolster burials and endowment fund contributions . 
Lake View had an operating deficit last year and has a poor reputation as an out-of-repair and crime-infested cemetery . 
The private , non-profit cemetery has had trouble competing against its for-profit counterparts , which use direct mail and other advertising to sell lots . 
`` We do n't want to be known as ambulance chasers , '' says William Garrison , Lake View 's president . 
`` We want people to think of Lake View as an historical park and educational experience ... . 
A pleasant place to come and spend a few hours . '' 
Not all of the cemetery 's better-known tenants lend themselves to the promotional job at hand , however . 
For example , President James A. Garfield is entombed here , the victim of an assassination in 1881 . 
( Mr. Garrison notes , however , that the Garfield tomb is one of the nation 's premier examples of Romanesque architecture . ) 
Mr. Rockefeller , buried beneath a 180-foot-tall granite obelisk , did n't seem right for an ad either . 
The oil magnate , who spent his later years passing out dimes to counter his penny-pinching image , `` is n't terribly amusing , '' says Barry Olson , creative director at Innis-Maggiore-Olson , Canton , Ohio , which is producing the ads . 
But there are plenty of other promising prospects at Lake View , promoters believe : Ernest Ball , for instance , who wrote `` When Irish Eyes are Smiling , '' and Garrett Morgan , the inventor of the gas mask and the tri-colored traffic light . 
Euro Disneyland shares made a debut like Snow White yesterday while most of the London stock market looked like it had eaten the Evil Queen 's poisoned apple . 
In its first day of when-issued trading here , Euro Disney soared like Dumbo to close at 814 pence ( $ 13.05 ) , up 15 % from its 707-pence offering price . 
The overall London market , following Wall Street 's early nosedive , took a late beating . 
The Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-Share Index plummeted 40.4 points to close at 2149.3 . 
Traders credited Euro Disney 's share performance to the tremendous hyping of the project that the shares are destined to help finance : Walt Disney Co. 's 4,800-acre theme park 20 miles east of Paris . 
The park is slated to open in 1992 . 
`` The issue was very well-received -- Disney is such a well-known , you can say world-wide , name , '' said Vernon Dempsey , head trader of European equities at Kleinwort Benson Ltd. , which is making a market in the issue . 
Mr. Dempsey estimated that the issue 's London debut was accompanied by `` very , very heavy turnover -- between five million and six million shares . '' 
Most of the buying was institutional , he added . 
Official trading in the shares will start in London , Paris and Brussels on Nov. 6 , when the French-franc denominated offering , valued at the equivalent of nearly $ 1 billion , comes to market in the European Community . 
U.S. investors will be permitted to buy the shares from EC investors 90 days later . 
Because of the interest connected with the issue , the London exchange took the unusual step of letting traders establish an officially sanctioned when-issued market . 
A volatile , unofficial `` gray '' market in the shares has been operating in Paris for about two weeks . 
In contrast to the London performance , Euro Disney there closed down three francs yesterday , at 79 1\/2 francs ( $ 12.66 ) bid , but still about 10 % over the 72-franc offering price . 
`` A lot of people are getting hurt on this wicked whipsawing , '' cautioned Alistair Cuddeford , a London-based Salomon Brothers International Ltd. trader who makes a market in franc-denominated Euro Disney shares . 
`` There should be no great rush for investors to buy this . 
A lot of big European banks , mostly French , and Swiss arb accounts have been buying the stock just to flip it '' for a quick profit , he said . 
Albert Fried Jr. , a 59-year-old director and holder of a 9.5 % stake in the company , was named chairman of this maker of products for the construction equipment , material handling and railroad industries . 
He succeeds L.L. White Jr. , 62 , who resigned but continues as a director . 
Mr. Fried also is the managing partner of Albert Fried & Co . 
Ford Motor Co. intensified its battle with General Motors Corp. over Jaguar PLC by saying it is prepared to make a bid for all of the British auto maker when restrictions on its shareholding are lifted . 
The statement was part of a Ford filing with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission . 
Ford did n't say how much it might offer for Jaguar , or when . 
The British government currently forbids any outside investor from holding more than 15 % of the company 's shares without permission until Dec. 31 , 
But with its stake in Jaguar , which it raised yesterday to 11.95 % , Ford could convene a special Jaguar shareholders ' meeting and urge holders to vote to drop the restriction sooner . 
A successful vote would put pressure on the British government to lift the restriction . 
`` We have not made that decision '' to seek a Jaguar special shareholders ' meeting , said Martyn Watkins , a Ford spokesman in London . 
He emphasized that the car maker only would bid for all of Jaguar under the right circumstances , and said `` those circumstances are n't right or possible at the moment . '' 
Last month , Ford announced plans to acquire as much as 15 % of Jaguar . 
Since then , Jaguar officials have confirmed that they are discussing an alliance with GM and said last week that they hoped to reach an agreement within a month . 
Analysts have been expecting a GM-Jaguar pact that would give the U.S. car maker an eventual 30 % stake in the British company and create joint ventures that would produce an executive-model range of cars . 
But the specter of Ford eventually launching a full-fledged bid could unravel the GM-Jaguar talks . 
Jaguar seems to be losing interest in giving GM a minority stake , said one individual close to the talks , adding , `` It would n't surprise me if { Jaguar executives } want to wait and see what the color of that { Ford bid } is '' first . 
He predicted Ford officials will meet with Jaguar executives in the next week to outline their proposed offer . 
Sir John Egan , Jaguar 's chairman , so far has refused to meet with Ford officials , but he is believed to be willing to consider a specific bid proposal . 
As for GM , its `` fallback position has to be a full bid itself , '' said Stephen Reitman , European auto-industry analyst at London brokers UBS-Phillips & Drew . 
A Ford takeover of Jaguar would `` have such implications for the balance of power in the 1990s that General Motors ca n't afford to step aside . 
They will have to throw their hat in the ring . '' 
A GM spokesman yesterday reiterated the company 's interest in acquiring a minority stake to help Jaguar remain independent . 
A pitched battle could mean Jaguar would fetch # 10 ( $ 16.02 ) a share , or about # 1.8 billion ( $ 2.88 billion ) , several analysts believe . 
The prospect of such a takeover fight has sent Jaguar shares soaring in recent weeks . 
U.S. takeover-stock speculators now own an estimated 25 % of Jaguar shares . 
In a declining London stock market yesterday , Jaguar shares were down four pence from Monday in late trading , at 694 pence ( $ 11.11 ) a share . 
In the U.S. , Jaguar 's American depositary receipts rose 12.5 cents in over-the-counter trading , to $ 11.25 . 
Both Ford and GM badly need a luxury brand to combat new competition from the Japanese in the European and U.S. markets . 
And financially strapped Jaguar has spent over a year looking for a rich uncle to provide cash and technological know-how . 
The company has expressed a preference for GM over Ford because GM has promised it would keep Jaguar independent . 
Ford 's need to acquire some or all of Jaguar became more acute last week when it abandoned a four-year effort to market its German-built Merkur Scorpio sedan as a European luxury import in the U.S. . 
Then , last Friday , Ford 's talks about a possible alliance with Saab-Scania AB of Sweden collapsed . 
GM 's interest in Jaguar reflects a desire to help diversify the U.S. company 's products in the growing luxury-car segment of the market . 
Its Opel line has a solid image and a recent string of highly successful new models , but it lacks Jaguar 's cachet . 
GM officials also see a lot of potential in marrying Jaguar 's cars to the technological know-how of Group Lotus PLC , a British engineering and specialty car maker GM bought in 1986 . 
Texaco Inc. reported an 11 % increase in third-quarter earnings , which it attributed partly to the company 's massive restructuring after it emerged from bankruptcy-law proceedings 18 months ago . 
Sun Co. also reported higher earnings . 
Meanwhile , like many other oil companies hurt by less-profitable downstream businesses , Mobil Corp. , Shell Oil Co. and Chevron Corp. reported lower quarterly earnings . 
Texaco 
Texaco 's exploration and production earnings improved as a result of its streamlining of those operations as it sold many of its marginal producing properties over the past 18 months . 
An increase in production at some major oil fields in the North Sea , which had been knocked out by an explosion in July 1988 , also aided results . 
The sale of a portion of refining and marketing operations to Saudi Arabia helped alleviate the decline in earnings from that business . 
`` The company has been completely revamped , '' said Frank Knuettel , analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc . 
Third-quarter net income at Texaco rose to $ 305 million from $ 274 million last year . 
Revenue declined 3.4 % , to $ 8.4 billion from $ 8.7 billion . 
Per-share earnings declined to $ 1.10 a share from $ 1.12 a share , largely because of 21 million additional shares issued to retire $ 1 billion of debt . 
Per-share earnings also shrank because of dividends on a new series of preferred stock . 
Sun Sun Co. 's net income climbed 18 % to $ 85 million , or 80 cents a share , from $ 72 million , or 67 cents a share . 
Revenue increased 11 % , to $ 2.73 billion from $ 2.46 billion . 
Sun said some of the growth reflects higher earnings in the oil sands operation of Suncor , a majority-owned Canadian subsidiary . 
Chairman Robert McClements Jr. said the synthetic crude oil production from the facility rose even as the price for that oil increased . 
Overseas exploration and production results also improved because of additional output from the North Sea Magnus Field , a portion of which was acquired by Sun earlier this year . 
Results declined , however , in Sun 's refining and marketing and coal businesses . 
Shell Oil 
Profits of Shell , a subsidiary of the Royal Dutch / Shell Group , tumbled $ 24 million , or 6.6 % , to $ 340 million , despite a gain of $ 30 million from an insurance settlement . 
President Frank Richardson attributed the decline to lower natural gas prices , which countered higher earnings from the crude oil sector of Shell 's exploration and production operation . 
Shaving away some of the gain in that unit was a decline in U.S. oil production to 502,000 barrels of oil a day during the quarter from 527,000 barrels a day last year . 
Shell 's chemical earnings fell by $ 67 million , to $ 137 million , reflecting lower margins and less demand for commodity chemicals . 
Mobil 
Net income at Mobil Corp. slipped 4.5 % to $ 532 million , or $ 1.30 a share , from $ 557 million , or $ 1.36 a share . 
Revenue declined $ 518 million , to $ 13.63 billion . 
Earnings included a one-time gain of $ 192 million on a property transaction in Hong Kong . 
Exploration and production profits slumped $ 40 million due to a provision for restructuring costs . 
The restructuring will take place over a two-year period and will involve the transfer and layoff of employees in U.S. operations to reduce costs and focus efforts in other areas . 
Last year , third-quarter earnings included a $ 157 million gain from foreign tax rate changes and a loss from a $ 65 million write-off of reserves . 
Chevron 
Chevron 's net income fell 0.7 % , to $ 417 million , or $ 1.22 a share , from $ 420 million , or $ 1.23 a share . 
Results included a $ 37 million gain from the sale of rights from Chevron 's investment in Amax Inc. , and a loss of $ 30 million from the sale of California oil and gas properties . 
Revenue rose 11 % , to $ 8 billion from $ 7.2 billion . 
Chevron said higher crude oil prices boosted profits from production operations , but margins in refining and marketing declined . 
Profits from U.S. exploration and production operations totaled $ 58 million , after the property sale loss , compared with a year-earlier $ 44 million loss that included a $ 16 million reorganization charge . 
Refining and marketing operations earned $ 130 million in the quarter this year , compared with earnings of $ 186 million a year earlier that included $ 18 million in charges for environmental programs . 
Foreign earnings fell to $ 180 million from $ 182 million that included a $ 48 million gain from lower Canadian and Australian taxes . 
Chemical profits fell to $ 78 million from $ 98 million . 
Jeff Rowe contributed to this article . 
Asarco Inc. , continuing its effort to refocus its business , ended its involvement in asbestos mining in the third quarter and said it would stop mining and selling coal by year end . 
The mining , metal and specialty-chemical concern said combined revenue for asbestos and coal was about $ 40 million of the company 's total revenue in 1988 of $ 1.98 billion . 
Richard de J. Osborne , chairman , president and chief executive officer , said the company 's `` decisions to get out of asbestos and high-sulfur coal continue the process of simplifying and focusing the company in areas with a better future . '' 
Asarco also reported third-quarter net income rose 14 % , to $ 52.7 million , or $ 1.25 a share , from a restated $ 46.2 million , or $ 1.10 a share , a year earlier . 
Asarco said the gain reflected continued strength in prices for refined copper , lead and zinc , and higher equity earnings in Mexico Desarrollo Industrial Minero S.A. , a Mexican mining company in which Asarco has a 34 % stake . 
The 1988 results were restated for accounting-rules changes . 
Sales rose 4.5 % to $ 522.3 million from $ 499.4 million . 
In August , Asarco , through its Lac d'Amiante du Quebec subsidiary , sold its remaining one-third interest in an asbestos mining limited partnership in Canada for $ 11.7 million . 
Asarco said it plans to shut down or sell its Rapatee coal mine and will end its involvement in southern Illinois strip mining . 
The company said that it is discussing a management-employee buy-out of the facility , but that it would stop mining and selling coal at year end when existing sales contracts expire , regardless of the outcome of those talks . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Asarco fell $ 1.375 to close at $ 31.75 . 
Companies listed below reported quarterly profit substantially different from the average of analysts ' estimates . 
The companies are followed by at least three analysts , and had a minimum five-cent change in actual earnings per share . 
Estimated and actual results involving losses are omitted . 
The percent difference compares actual profit with the 30-day estimate where at least three analysts have issues forecasts in the past 30 days . 
Otherwise , actual profit is compared with the 300-day estimate . 
David W. Lodge was elected vice president and chief financial officer , effective Nov. 1 . 
Mr. Lodge , 48 years old , a former finance executive at Singer Sewing Machine Co. and Celanese Corp. , succeeds Francis L. Brophy , 64 , who plans to retire from the company next year . 
Carlos A. Salvagni , vice president , pharmaceutical manufacturing , will assume responsibility for manufacturing in Kalamazoo , Mich. , effective Nov. 1 . 
Mr. Salvagni , 53 years old , succeeds John C. Griffin , 57 , who is retiring as corporate vice president of pharmaceutical manufacturing . 
Upjohn is a world-wide provider of health-care products and services , seeds and speciality chemicals . 
This Brooklyn , N.Y. , generic-drug maker announced a 5 % stock dividend payable Dec. 15 , to holders of record Nov. 15 . 
As of Sept. 30 , Halsey had 5.3 million common shares outstanding . 
Jay Marcus , president , said the move `` reflects the confidence of our board and management in Halsey 's long-term prospects and our desire to provide our shareholders with an attractive return on their investment . '' 
In American Stock Exchange composite trading , Halsey closed at $ 5.8125 a share , up 6.25 cents . 
Walter M. Brady was named a senior vice president of this insurer in the Canadian head office . 
He had been vice president in that office . 
John B. Foy was named senior vice president and remains responsible for the individual policy services department . 
Frank J. Ollari was named senior vice president in charge of the mortgage finance department . 
He had been vice president of the department , which was formerly called the real estate department . 
Timothy C. Brown , a vice president , was named executive vice president and a director of this lighting and specialty products concern . 
In the director post , Mr. Brown , 38 years old , succeeds Joseph W. Hibben , who retired from the board in August . 
C. Barr Schuler , 49 , vice president and chief financial officer , was named senior vice president of corporate development and acquisitions , a new post . 
Phillip J. Stuecker , 37 , vice president , secretary and treasurer , was named vice president of finance and chief financial officer . 
He remains secretary . 
Ronald B. Koenig , 55 years old , was named a senior managing director of the Gruntal & Co. brokerage subsidiary of this insurance and financial-services firm . 
Mr. Koenig will build the corporate-finance and investment-banking business of Gruntal , which has primarily been a retail-based firm . 
He was chairman and co-chief executive officer of Ladenburg , Thalmann & Co. until July , when he was named co-chairman of the investment-banking firm along with Howard L. Blum Jr. , who then became the sole chief executive . 
Yesterday , Mr. Blum , 41 , said he was n't aware of plans at Ladenburg to name a co-chairman to succeed Mr. Koenig and said the board would need to approve any appointments or title changes . 
Mr. Blum added he was n't surprised Mr. Koenig resigned , but his departure was `` nothing that we desired or worked for . '' 
Mr. Koenig said : `` I just got a tremendous offer from Gruntal . 
MCI Communications Corp. said it received a $ 12 million contract to provide virtual network services to Woolworth Corp. 's 5,600 corporate and retail sites in the 
The contract also provides for advanced billing and network management services . 
Woolworth said it expects to expand usage of the MCI services as it adds about 6,000 business locations over the next few years . 
The Philippine merchandise trade deficit widened to $ 1.71 billion during the first eight months of 1989 from $ 807 million a year earlier . 
Imports continued to outpace Philippine exports , despite gains in shipments abroad , the government National Statistics Office said . 
Exports reached $ 5.12 billion , up from $ 4.52 billion a year earlier , while imports rose to $ 6.81 billion from $ 5.33 billion . 
The trade deficit in the first eight months is already wider than the trade gap of $ 1.09 billion for all of 1988 . 
Analysts expect the trade gap for the year to surpass $ 2 billion as demand for capital equipment and raw materials continues to push imports higher . 
Birtcher Corp. said it signed a definitive agreement with C.R. Bard Inc. , a Murray Hill , N.J. , maker of health-care products , for the purchase of the company 's Bard / EMS Electrosurgery division for about $ 11 million . 
Birtcher , a maker of electronic medical equipment , said the transaction is expected to close on or before Nov. 30 . 
Bard / EMS had 1988 sales of about $ 14 million , Birtcher said . 
WINSTON-SALEM , N.C. -- 
First Wachovia Corp. said John F. McNair III will retire as president and chief executive officer of this regional banking company 's Wachovia Corp. and Wachovia Bank & Trust Co. subsidiaries on Dec. 31 . 
Mr. McNair , 62 years old , will be succeeded by L.M. `` Bud '' Baker Jr. , 47 , the parent 's chief credit officer and head of its administration division . 
Mr. Baker will relinquish his previous positions , but a successor for him has n't been named yet . 
In addition , on Jan. 1 , Thomas A. Bennett , 52 , will become vice chairman and chief operating officer of Wachovia and Wachovia Bank & Trust , filling a vacancy left by the retired Hans W. Wanders in April . 
Mr. Bennett will continue as executive in charge of the North Carolina banking operation . 
Messrs. Baker and Bennett have been elected directors of Wachovia and Wachovia Bank & Trust filling vacant seats on both boards . 
Canadian retail sales rose 0.2 % in August from July , Statistics Canada , a federal agency , said . 
The August increase followed a 0.3 % decline in July . 
During the past four months , retail sales have remained generally weak , advancing an average 0.2 % a month , the agency said . 
Raw-steel production by the nation 's mills decreased 0.7 % last week to 1,816,000 tons from 1,828,000 tons the previous week , the American Iron and Steel Institute said . 
Last week 's output fell 1.7 % from the 1,848,000 tons produced a year earlier . 
The industry used 81.6 % of its capability last week , compared with 82.2 % the previous week and 86.2 % a year ago . 
The American Iron and Steel Institute reported : The capability utilization rate is a calculation designed to indicate at what percent of its production capability the industry is operating in a given week . 
With reduced exports and rising imports , South Korea 's trade surpluses with the U.S. and Europe between January and September fell sharply from a year ago , the Customs Administration said . 
Officials said South Korea 's trade surplus with the U.S. for the first nine months of the year totaled $ 3.49 billion , down 43 % from the same period last year on a customs-clearance basis . 
South Korean exports to the U.S. during the period fell 1.6 % from a year ago to $ 15.06 billion , while imports from the U.S. soared 26 % to $ 11.56 billion . 
The trade surplus with Europe was pegged at $ 414 million , down 57 % from a year ago . 
Officials said South Korean exports to Europe dropped 5.3 % to $ 3.02 billion while imports from there went up 17 % to $ 2.61 billion . 
Bausch & Lomb Inc. said its pharmaceuticals subsidiary agreed to supply collagen corneal shields for animal eye surgery to a unit of International Minerals & Chemical Corp . 
Terms were n't disclosed . 
The agreement marks Bausch & Lomb 's first venture selling its eye care products for use by veterinarians . 
The collagen corneal shield helps speed healing of the cornea after eye surgery . 
The product will be distributed by Pitman-Moore Inc. , a subsidiary of International Minerals . 
France 's industrial production index for July and August rose 1 % from June and was up 4.6 % from a year ago , according to seasonally adjusted data from the National Statistics Institute . 
The state agency , which usually publishes the data on monthly basis , but traditionally combines the index for the two summer-holiday months , said the advance was led by output of consumer goods , which rose 3.5 % from June and was up 7.2 % from a year earlier . 
Semifinished goods turned in a strong showing , with a monthly rise of 2 % and a year-on-year advance of 3 % . 
Food production was ahead 1.7 % from June and 5.3 % from a year earlier . 
Output in the capital-goods sector was ahead 0.9 % on a monthly basis and 2.7 % year on year . 
These gains were partly offset by output of cars and other consumer durables , which eased 3.9 % from June 's high level . 
The sector was still 8.8 % above its output levels from a year earlier , however . 
International Minerals & Chemical Corp. said it agreed definitively to sell its international fragrance business to Bayer AG of West Germany . 
Terms were n't disclosed . 
The maker of animal health and nutrition products said the business , Creations Aromatiques of Port Valais , Switzerland , and Woodside , N.Y. , is a division of its Mallinckrodt Inc. subsidiary and had sales of about $ 30 million for its most recent year . 
International Minerals said the sale will allow Mallinckrodt to focus its resources on its core businesses of medical products , specialty chemicals and flavors . 
Consumers Power Co. filed with the Michigan Public Service Commission a contract to buy power from the Palisades nuclear plant under a proposed new ownership arrangement for the plant . 
Consumers Power and Bechtel Power Corp. last year announced a joint venture to buy the plant , currently owned completely by the utility . 
Two Japanese scientists said they discovered an antibody that , in laboratory test-tube experiments , kills AIDS-infected cells while preserving healthy cells . 
If further experiments are successful , the work would represent a major advance in research on acquired immune deficiency syndrome . 
The drug AZT , the only treatment currently on the market , claims only to help stop the spread of AIDS , not to cure it . 
But several analysts and Japanese scientists familiar with the study , which was announced at a conference in Nagoya yesterday , expressed skepticism over the significance of the results . 
And the researchers themselves acknowledged they still must do much more work before they can say whether the treatment would actually cure humans . 
Shin Yonehara , a research scientist at the Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science , said the antibody he discovered works by recognizing an antigen called a Fas-antigen , which is characteristic of an infected cell . 
The antibody then kills the cell . 
Dr. Yonehara and his partner , Nobuyuki Kobayashi of Yamaguchi University , said their experiments showed that the antibody wiped out an average of 60 % of AIDS-infected cells within three days . 
In some of the experiments , it killed almost all the infected cells , the researchers said . 
Meanwhile , fewer than 10 % of the healthy cells were killed . 
The two said they must still do more laboratory tests , then experiment on animals . 
They said they hoped to conduct tests on human patients in the U.S. by late next year . 
Japan does n't have enough AIDS patients to do significant experimentation in that country , they said . 
The announcement got wide exposure in the Japanese media , and even moved some pharmaceutical stocks yesterday . 
But Takashi Kitamura , director of the biology department at Japan 's National Institute of Health and secretary of the government 's AIDS-research center , said , `` I 'm not so optimistic of its future use in therapeutic methods . '' 
He said some infected cells may not have the relevant antigen and so would n't be killed even after exposure to the antibody . 
`` The results seem to be very premature , '' said Mitsuru Miyata , editor of Nikkei Biotechnology , a leading Japanese industry newsletter . 
Dr. Kobayashi responded that he thought the antibody could potentially kill all infected cells . 
But he and Dr. Yonehara said there were still several uncertainties , particularly regarding possible side effects . 
`` Our antibody specifically killed infected cells at a very low dose , but it can also kill other cells , '' said Dr. Yonehara . 
`` We do n't know the effect of our antibody on the human body . '' 
AIDS is n't considered a widespread problem in Japan -- the government reports about 1,000 known carriers of the virus -- but many companies have poured substantial resources into research in recent years , hoping to cash in on a possible cure . 
Dr. Kitamura said about 35 projects are currently under way in Japan , and that Japanese researchers in the past year have made available three possible cures to American researchers for clinical tests . 
He said that when scientists from the two countries meet again in January in New Orleans , the Japanese will present at least three more drugs for human testing . 
AZT is the world 's only prescription medicine approved for treating the disease . 
Wellcome PLC , a major British pharmaceutical maker , sells the drug under the name Retrovir . 
A Wellcome spokesman declined to comment on the discovery of the antibody in Japan . 
But Andrew Porter , a drug-industry analyst at Nikko Securities Co. in London , said if the product were to be successfully developed it would represent `` a potential threat to the long-term viability of Retrovir . 
The following issues were recently filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission : 
American Exploration Co. , offering of five million common shares , via Smith Barney , Harris Upham & Co. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc . 
Chemical Waste Management Inc. , proposed global offering of 8,500,000 shares of common stock , of which seven million of the shares will be offered in the U.S. and 1,500,000 shares will be offered overseas , via Merrill Lynch Capital Markets ( domestic ) and Kidder , Peabody & Co . ( international ) . 
Interlake Corp. , proposed offering of $ 200 million of senior subordinated debentures , via Goldman , Sachs & Co . 
InterMedia Capital Corp. , Robin Cable Systems L.P. and Brenmor Cable Partners , offering of senior subordinated discount reset debentures , via Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc . 
John Nuveen & Co. , initial offerings of the Nuveen California Performance Plus Municipal Fund Inc. and the Nuveen New York Performance Plus Municipal Fund Inc. , via Alex . Brown & Sons Inc . 
KnowledgeWare Inc. , initial offering of three million shares of its common stock , of which 1,657,736 shares will be sold by the company and 1,342,264 will be sold by holders , via Montgomery Securities and Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp . 
MGM Grand Inc. , proposed offering of six million shares of common stock , via Merrill Lynch . 
Microlog Corp. , formerly called Old Dominion Systems Inc. , offering of 1.2 million common shares , of which one million will be sold by the company , and the balance by holders , via Hambrecht & Quist and Johnston , Lemon & Co . 
Scott Paper Co. , shelf offering of up to $ 360 million of debt securities , via Goldman Sachs , Salomon Brothers Inc. and Smith Barney , Harris Upham . 
Sullivan Graphics Inc. , offering of $ 110 million of senior subordinated notes , via Merrill Lynch . 
Sun Sportswear Inc. , initial offering of 1.7 million common shares , of which one million shares will be sold by the company , and the balance by a holder , via Salomon Brothers Inc. and Piper , Jaffray & Hopwood Inc . 
Yes Clothing Co. , proposed initial offering of 776,470 common shares , of which 600,000 shares will be offered by the company and 176,470 by holders , via Seidler Amdec Securities Inc . 
A # 320 million ( $ 508 million ) British Airways PLC rights issue flopped badly -- the victim of recent market turbulence and the collapse of the buy-out bid for United Airlines ' parent , UAL Corp . 
The United Kingdom carrier had planned the issue to help finance its $ 750 million purchase of a 15 % stake in UAL . 
But British Airways withdrew from the UAL labor-management buy-out plan last Friday , after the group failed to get bank financing for its $ 6.79 billion buy-out . 
British Airways said its shareholders accepted only 6.3 % of the convertible capital bonds , but that the rest of the issue will be taken up by underwriters . 
Analysts said that 6.3 % level marked the poorest showing for any major British rights issue since the 1987 global stock market crash . 
`` It is close to being a record undersubscription , '' said Bob Bucknell , an analyst with London broker Smith New Court Securities . 
`` Fund managers do n't like to have rights issues that do n't have an obvious reason . 
The obvious reason was ( for British Air ) to buy a stake in United Airlines . '' 
In a statement , British Air Chairman Lord King said the company was `` obviously disappointed that the issue was not taken up , but it would have been unreasonable to expect a better result given the volatility of the stock market since the launch of the issue . '' 
But except for the embarrassment , British Air will emerge relatively unscathed from the flopped issue . 
Underwriters led by Lazard Brothers & Co. will pick up the rest of the airline 's offer of four convertible capital bonds for every nine common shares . 
Lazard and other primary underwriters have reduced or eliminated their exposure by sub-underwriting the issue among U.K. institutional investors . 
`` The ( paper ) loss here is very small '' for these sub-underwriters , observed John Nelson , a Lazard managing director . 
In any case , he added , `` most institutions probably wo n't sell '' the bonds . 
And instead of buying the UAL stake , the U.K. carrier will be able to reduce its high debt level and build an acquisition war chest . 
`` From a cash flow point of view , British Airways is better off not being in United Airlines in the short term , '' said Andy Chambers , an analyst at Nomura Research Institute in London . 
Added another U.K. analyst : `` It gives them some cash in the back pocket for when they want to do something . '' 
For instance , British Air is continuing to negotiate with KLM Royal Dutch Airlines about each acquiring a 20 % stake in Sabena World Airlines , the air transport subsidiary of the Belgian national airline . 
A definitive agreement had been expected by the end of July . 
The failed rights issue also should have a modest impact on British Air shares . 
The airline 's share price already is far below the 210 pence ( $ 3.33 ) level seen after the company announced the rights issue in late September . 
In late trading on London 's Stock Exchange yesterday , the shares were off three pence at 194 pence . 
And because British Air is issuing convertible bonds rather than ordinary shares , the share price wo n't be directly hurt by any surplus left with underwriters after they try to sell the issue in the open market . 
But British Air 's withdrawal from the UAL buy-out could have further repercussions . 
Some analysts speculated yesterday that the move has set off a board room split , which may lead to the resignation of Sir Colin Marshall , the carrier 's chief executive officer . 
`` The stories are rubbish , '' a British Air spokesman said . 
`` There is no difference of opinion between ( Chairman ) Lord King and Sir Colin on any aspect of company policy . 
MINORITY RECRUITING has yet to meet hopes raised by Bush administration . 
Six months ago , as some personnel specialists saw it , a perception that President Bush really cared about fair employment -- after what they said was eight years of Reagan-era neglect -- was prodding top management to raise hiring goals for females , blacks and other minorities . 
The perception lingers , says an official at a major industrial company . 
But so far , he declares , there 's little evidence the `` new urgency '' is trickling down to the managers who actually do hiring . 
`` Is there really a commitment or an illusion of activity ? '' he asks . 
The recruiting `` has n't materialized , '' asserts Jeffrey Christian , who runs a search agency . 
Samuel Hall , Howard University 's placement director , also does n't see it . 
And he questions the White House dedication . 
`` I do n't think the Bush administration has done anything , '' he says . 
Recruiter Donald Clark does note an increase in searches for minority candidates . 
But some of the activity , he says , may reflect a rush to get `` numbers in order '' for end-of-year reports . 
PAY FOR PERFORMANCE hangs mostly on boss 's subjective view . 
Du Pont Co. in a couple of units has installed objective tests based on earnings or return on equity . 
Many companies have set up machinery to assure workers a fair shake . 
At most firms , though , it 's the immediate supervisor who decides the merit increases subordinates will be paid . 
Managers have `` some very broad discretion , '' says an official at Walt Disney Co . 
Unocal Corp. 's top management sets guidelines , but line supervisors slice up the merit pie . 
Lotus Development Corp. feeds its evaluations into a computer , but only for storage ; the decisions are made by supervisors . 
Hershey Foods Corp. strives for fairness by basing increases on quarterly reviews , annual appraisals and meetings with workers . 
At Chemfix Technology Inc. , each supervisor 's recommendation must be approved by the next boss up the line , and then sanctioned by a salary review committee . 
JAPANESE COMPANIES fare best in U.S. when they give Americans more say . 
University of Michigan researchers find the companies earn more and win a bigger market share when their American employees get a voice in planning , product development and design , including decision-making back in Japan . 
`` You ca n't hire competent Americans and say , ` Let them run only their own show , ' '' says Vladimir Pucik , who headed the study run with Egon Zehnder International , a search firm . 
The researchers say many Japanese companies err in the U.S. by adopting the American practice of hiring managers on the `` open market . '' 
In Japan , by contrast , companies tend to develop their own talent and promote from within . 
The Japanese also are accused of keeping their cards too close to their vests . 
`` Some Japanese executives are not yet ... comfortable about sharing strategic information with their American colleagues , '' the researchers say . 
Americans stay longer with Japanese firms than American companies . 
But they think promotions are limited . 
THE HOUSE votes down a proposal to put pension plans under the control of joint labor-management boards . 
Some consultants had insisted it would n't work . 
LONG-TERM care insurance gains favor . 
More than half the people surveyed for the Employee Benefit Research Institute say they would be willing and able to pick up most of the cost of the coverage . 
FRINGE-BENEFIT spending by small and medium-sized employers has dropped to 25 % of payroll from 29 % three years ago , says the National Institute of Business Management , an advisory service . 
OUSTED EXECUTIVES over 50 years old take slightly less time than their younger colleagues to find a job -- 3.23 months vs. 3.26 for the juniors -- outplacement firm Challenger , Gray & Christmas finds . 
It 's the first time in the survey 's 15 years that the over-50 group came out ahead . 
FEAR OF AIDS hinders hiring at few hospitals . 
Dedication runs high . 
Wafaa El-Sadr , who heads the AIDS program at New York City 's Harlem Hospital Center , ca n't find help . 
`` I 've been recruiting every single day since it 's been identified that many AIDS patients come from the inner city , '' she says . 
She was the only staff physician available to treat AIDS patients last summer and now she has the help of only two doctors part time . 
Part of the problem , though , may reflect a general unwillingness to work with the urban poor . 
Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas says it has n't had any problem recruiting , even after a nurse contracted the virus while injecting an AIDS patient . 
`` I can tell you that nobody quit over it . 
No one panicked , '' a spokeswoman says . 
St. Paul Medical Center , also in Dallas , sees only a `` minimal erosion '' of support staff due to AIDS . 
Yale-New Haven Hospital sees no problem , says John Fenn , the chief of staff . 
`` There are enough enlightened and spirited individuals who know their responsibilities , '' he says . 
THE CHECKOFF : At least somebody gains on layoffs . 
The Association of Outplacement Consulting Firms says the industry 's volume has soared tenfold since 1980 , to $ 350 million a year ... . 
And somebody loses on the expected repeal of Section 89 , the benefits test fought by most employers . 
Triad Solutions says software producers had each invested hundreds of thousands of dollars in programs that now have no use . 
Big gains for the ultra-right Republicans party in Baden-Wuerttemburg state municipal elections Sunday showed eroding support for Chancellor Helmut Kohl in a traditional bastion for his Christian Democratic Union . 
With ballots from most of the state 's major cities in by yesterday morning , the Republicans came away with 10 % of the vote in several of the key districts . 
With many rural districts yet to report ballots , election officials estimate support for Christian Democrats fell an average five percentage points statewide . 
The left-of-center Social Democrats and the environmental Greens party posted mixed results . 
Headed by a former Waffen SS sergeant and working from a nationalistic platform of anti-foreigner rhetoric , the fledgling Republicans party has scored surprising gains in earlier elections in the states of West Berlin , Hesse and North-Rhine Westphalia . 
With West German unemployment remaining high at two million jobless and the lack of affordable housing becoming a primary issue for next year 's campaign , the Republicans are seen drawing support for their `` Germans First '' stand on social-welfare issues . 
Election analysts acknowledge that a `` Red-Green '' coalition of Social Democrats and Greens could edge out Chancellor Kohl 's coalition in the December 1990 national election if support for the Republicans continues to spread . 
International investigators urged Britain to allow prosecution of suspected Nazi war criminals who took refuge there after 1945 . 
Under current law , such suspects are immune from prosecution for acts committed while not British citizens . 
`` If we 're not careful we could become known as a haven for war criminals , '' said Jeff Rooker , a member of Parliament and one of several British politicians attending a London conference with government investigators from the U.S. , Canada and Australia . 
A parliamentary inquiry found in July that more than 70 people living in Britain could have been part of death squads that roamed Nazi-occupied Eastern Europe . 
Parliament is expected to discuss next month whether to change the law . 
British investigations were prompted by a list of 17 alleged war criminals living in Britain sent to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in October 1986 by the Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles . 
In a sign of easing tension between Beijing and Hong Kong , China said it will again take back illegal immigrants caught crossing into the British colony . 
China had refused to repatriate citizens who sneaked into Hong Kong illegally since early this month , when the colony allowed a dissident Chinese swimmer to flee to the U.S. . 
About 1,100 Chinese were awaiting repatriation yesterday . 
Italy 's Foreign Ministry said it is investigating exports to the Soviet Union by an Ing . C. Olivetti & Co. subsidiary called OCN-PPL that makes numerically controlled machine tools . 
Although Italy 's investigation of whether Olivetti had violated Western export-control rules had previously been made known , this marked the first time the unit and product were named . 
The U.S. is worried about the convertibility of Olivetti 's machine tools to military use . 
However , an Olivetti spokeswoman said OCN-PPL , of which Olivetti sold the majority interest last year , `` does n't make equipment that has the type of precision necessary for sophisticated productions . '' 
Conservationists say that drift-net fishing threatens to wipe out much of the world 's tuna stocks in a few years . 
But the Japanese Fisheries Association criticized moves to ban the practice in international waters . 
`` It is really unfortunate for human beings to be swayed by emotional discussions , '' the association said . 
In driftnet , or `` wall of death , '' fishing , fleets lay nets up to three miles long that trap almost everything in their path . 
Earlier this year , Japan said it would cut the number of its drift-net vessels in the South Pacific by two-thirds , or down to 20 . 
Workers at Peugeot S.A. 's car plant at Sochaux , in eastern France , voted to end a six-week-old strike that has cost the Peugeot group production of 60,000 automobiles , a company spokesman said . 
The strikers voted to accept a series of management proposals that will give them a higher basic wage , better profit-sharing benefits and bigger annual bonuses . 
The spokesman said the vote at Sochaux is expected to be followed by a similar move at the company 's assembly plant at Mulhouse , where the number of strikers has been whittled down to 80 . 
About 8,000 National Union of Mineworkers members resumed their strike against De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd. after further negotiations to settle a wage dispute broke down . 
Striking workers , who began striking five diamond mines on Oct. 13 , had returned to work last week when the union and De Beers arranged to reopen negotiations . 
A De Beers spokesman said yesterday the company had offered to increase the minimum wage by 18 % , while the union was demanding 26.6 % . 
Before the two parties resumed talks last week , De Beers offered 17 % and the union wanted 37.6 % . 
China 's People 's Daily took note of the growing problem of computer fraud . 
Since the first fraud was discovered in July 1986 at an office of the People 's Bank of China in Shenzhen , 15 major cases have been found , the paper said ; the biggest was the theft of $ 235,000 from a bank in Chengdu in March 1988 . 
The number of computers has mushroomed in recent years , with 10,000 in use , as well as 30,000 miniature models . 
But security systems , effective management controls and regulations to govern their use have not kept pace , the People 's Daily said . 
Besides money , criminals have also used computers to steal secrets and intelligence , the newspaper said , but it gave no more details . 
Japanese tourists will be told to take care when photographing earthquake damage in San Francisco , the Japan Association of Travel Agents said . 
The association issued an advisory to its 1,685 member agencies following a report from the Foreign Ministry that picture-taking by Japanese tourists in earthquake-stricken areas was causing ill feeling among local residents ... . 
Tass said Lenin 's tomb in Red Square will be closed from Nov. 10 to Jan. 15 for essential maintenance . 
The red granite mausoleum draws thousands of visitors daily . 
Fatalities on rural interstates rose 33 % between 1986 and last year , the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said in a report on the impact of the 65 miles-per-hour speed limit on those roads . 
The report to Congress said that fatalities rose 18 % in 1987 and 13 % in 1988 on rural interstates . 
The 1987 highway bill permitted states to raise the speed limit to 65 mph from 55 mph on interstate roads , which are defined as highways that pass through areas with fewer than 50,000 people . 
Since 1987 , 40 states have increased the speed limit on rural interstates . 
`` About one-third of the fatality increase is attributed to greater travel , and about two-thirds is attributed to other factors { primarily to greater speed } , '' according to NHTSA . 
The report showed that deaths on urban interstate highways rose 7 % between 1986 and last year , while fatalities on non-interstate roads were about the same in 1988 as in 1986 . 
In states that raised the speed limit on rural interstates , the fatality rate rose about 18 % to 1.7 deaths per 100 million miles traveled between 1986 and 1988 . 
In contrast , the fatality rate in the states that retained the 55 mph limit was 0.9 last year , the same as in 1986 . 
Well-Seasoned Reasoning 
( `` Food manufacturer changes spelling of ` catsup ' to ` ketchup , ' saying that 's the spelling people now prefer . '' 
-- WSJ Business Bulletin ) 
Public preference is important , So product names should match up , And firms that find they 're lagging behind Should now take steps to ketchup ! 
-- George O. Ludcke . 
Judge Not 
How easy it is To attack others ' views Without ever setting A foot in their shoes ! 
-- G. Sterling Leiby . 
Daffynition 
Money-making course : wad-working . 
-- Thomas Henry . 
In an Oct. 10 editorial-page article , `` It 's the World Bank 's Turn to Adjust , '' Paul Craig Roberts lays most of the blame for what ails developing countries at the doorstep of the World Bank . 
The article is , unfortunately , replete with outrageous distortions . 
One of Mr. Roberts 's observations is that the Bank 's own loan portfolio is in deep trouble because of its lending to developing countries . 
This is just not so . 
The reality is that Bank finances are rock solid . 
As of June 30 , 1989 -- the day our past fiscal year came to a close -- only 4.1 % of the Bank 's portfolio was affected by arrears of over six months . 
This is an enviably low level . 
Moreover , the Bank follows a prudent provisioning policy and has set aside $ 800 million against possible loan losses . 
For the same fiscal year , by the way , the Bank 's net income was a robust $ 1.1 billion after provisions . 
Because of the business-like manner in which the Bank goes about development , financial markets have confidence in it . 
This helps explain the triple-A rating enjoyed by our bonds and our ability to borrow $ 9.3 billion in fiscal 1989 on the most advantageous terms . 
Another of Mr. Roberts 's criticisms is that Bank lending has done more harm than good `` by implanting the wrong incentives and deflecting energy away from economic development . '' 
Here , too , Mr. Roberts is way off the mark . 
The reality is that Bank loans have been linked to policy improvements for 40 years . 
Our traditional project loans have , for instance , supported sensible energy pricing in the power sector , sound interest-rate policies in the credit area and the operation of public utilities as efficient , autonomous agencies . 
By and large , these efforts have borne fruit . 
In my home region , Latin America , much of the existing infrastructure base -- an important building block for development -- has been financed by the World Bank . 
Mr. Roberts also takes a swipe at the Bank 's adjustment lending . 
What are the facts on this type of lending ? 
The Bank has been making adjustment loans for 10 years . 
As their name implies , these operations are linked to far-reaching policy reforms that aim at helping borrowing countries get back on the growth path and at enhancing their credit-worthiness . 
Typically , these measures include reforms to downsize the role of government and parastatals in the economy , to open up inward-looking economies to international competition and to promote the development of a vigorous private sector . 
Support for the private sector has been a longstanding concern of the Bank 's . 
Over the years , it has helped encourage investments by entrepreneurs in the Third World through its extensive credit operations and through loans and investments by the International Finance Corp . 
Most recently , the Bank Group has been expanded to include the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency to stimulate direct foreign investment in developing countries by offering guarantees against noncommercial risk and advice to member countries on how to improve their business climate . 
These are not the actions of a development agency wed to central planning and to the concentration of investment decisions in the hands of government , as Mr. Roberts alleges . 
Rather , they reflect the Bank 's time-tested , pragmatic approach , which aims at ensuring that developing countries put their scarce resources to the best possible use . 
Francisco Aguirre-Sacasa Director , External Affairs The World Bank 
The government said it would streamline its enormous and often-criticized food marketing and distribution network , Compania Nacional de Subsistencias Populares , or Conasupo . 
Conasupo Director Ignacio Ovalle Fernandez said the agency will sell 589 midsized supermarkets and several food-production plants and warehouses beginning early next year . 
The agency will withdraw from the production of nine food products , maintaining production of the two most important ones , corn and milk . 
Mr. Ovalle also said Conasupo will cut back subsidies to producers of nonessential farm products and close retail outlets in wealthy neighborhoods . 
The agency 's workers and private companies would be allowed to bid for the assets up for sale . 
Conasupo controls prices on agricultural goods and operates retail outlets where basic consumer items are sold at state-subsidized prices . 
Business leaders have long criticized the agency as a leading example of bureacratic waste . 
Private-sector leaders praised the Conasupo restructuring . 
But most economists doubt the streamlining would cut deeply into Conasupo government subsidy , which largely goes to reduce consumer prices for corn and milk . 
The Food and Drug Administration banned all imports of mushrooms from China in response to a rash of food-poisoning outbreaks linked to canned Chinese mushrooms . 
`` The agency has concluded that contamination may be widespread throughout the mushroom-processing industry in China , '' an FDA spokesman said yesterday . 
The agency wo n't allow mushrooms that were canned or packed in brine at any Chinese plant to enter the U.S. until `` satisfactory sanitation-control measures are implemented in China to prevent '' bacterial contamination . 
On May 19 , the FDA began detaining Chinese mushrooms in 68-ounce cans after more than 100 people in Mississippi , New York and Pennsylvania became ill from eating tainted mushrooms . 
In subsequent tests , the agency found smaller-size cans from several Chinese plants to be similarly contaminated . 
The outbreaks were traced to staphylococcus aureus , a type of bacteria that produces a toxin capable of surviving the high temperatures used in canning vegetables . 
A recall of the mushrooms blamed for the food poisoning began in early March . 
In 1987 , China exported 65 million pounds of mushrooms , valued at $ 47 million , to the U.S. . 
The shipments went mostly to food-service distributors that supply pizzerias and restaurants . 
A spokesman for the Chinese Embassy here said that the Beijing government has taken `` many effective measures '' to stop the mushroom contamination and is further investigating the underlying causes . 
He predicted the problem will be solved `` very soon . '' 
Your Sept. 26 `` Politics & Policy '' article about William Bennett 's Emergency Drug Plan for Washington gives the impression that the FBI has not been nor is actively involved . 
This is not the case . 
The FBI is very supportive of and an active participant in Mr. Bennett 's initiative . 
It was agreed at the outset of the Washington Drug Initiative that the FBI 's role would be to continue targeting the major drug traffickers through our National Drug Strategy . 
Through these investigations we do not focus on the street drug user , but rather we target and attack major drug-trafficking organizations that control a large segment of the drug market . 
The trial of Raful Edmond III in Washington serves to highlight our efforts in this area and the results achieved through our excellent working relationship with the Drug Enforcement Administration and the Metropolitan Police Department ( MPD ) . 
The FBI 's role is to complement the D.C. initiative through not only these major trafficking investigations , but also by providing a full range of services through various task forces and our contacts with local police squads handling drug-related crimes . 
In fact , we have agents assigned full time to assist the MPD in drug-related crimes such as homicide and other crimes of violence . 
Milt Ahlerich Assistant Director Office of Public Affairs Federal Bureau of Investigation 
Ramada Inc. revised the terms of its restructuring and extended to Feb. 28 , 1990 , the deadline to complete the sale of its hotel business to New World Development Co. of Hong Kong and Prime Motor Inns Inc. of Fairfield , N.J . 
Ramada 's previous plan was derailed by upheaval in the junk-bond market that hindered the offering of $ 400 million in high-yield securities of Aztar Corp. , the new company that will operate Ramada 's casinos in Nevada and Atlantic City , 
Under the new terms , New World will still pay $ 540 million for Ramada 's hotel business , subject to adjustment at closing , but Ramada will now reimburse New World for $ 10 million in expenses . 
Prime will still manage Ramada 's domestic franchise system when the sale closes . 
Revised terms call for each Ramada common share to be exchanged for $ 1 in cash , subject to possible reduction , and one share of Aztar common stock . 
Shareholders will also receive one cent per share for the redemption of preferred stock purchase rights . 
The cash payout will be reduced by 40 % of any amount by which the weighted mean price of Ramada 's common stock exceeds $ 14 on the day the transaction closes . 
The provision will help provide for tax liabilities that may stem from the restructuring . 
Ramada 's stock rose 87.5 cents on the news to close at $ 11.25 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading . 
The announcement dispelled some Wall Street observers ' fears that New World might demand a huge premium for the delay , or scrap the deal entirely . 
The previous deadline to complete the sale was Nov. 30 . 
One major advantage of the revised plan is that Aztar will have far less debt than under the old terms . 
`` They 'll go from being one of the most leveraged to one of the least leveraged casino companies , '' said Daniel Lee , an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc . 
Mr. Lee values the package at between $ 15 and $ 20 a share , based on current trading prices of other casino-company stocks . 
The much-revised restructuring , which was first announced in October 1988 , must again be approved by shareholders and state casino regulators in Nevada and New Jersey . 
Financing plans include raising $ 170 million in debt secured by the company 's holdings in New Jersey . 
In May , Ramada sold its Marie Callender Pie Shops Inc. unit to a group of private investors as part of its plan to focus on its casinos in Atlantic City and in Las Vegas and Laughlin , Nev . 
Bond prices took the high road and stock prices took the low road as worries mounted about the economy and the junk bond market . 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 26.23 points to 2662.91 in sluggish trading . 
But long-term Treasury bonds staged a modest rally , with prices on most issues rising about half a point , or $ 5 for each $ 1,000 face amount . 
The dollar sagged against other major currencies in lethargic trading . 
Traders and analysts said the divergence between the stock and bond markets is a sign of growing unease about the economic outlook . 
A sinking economy depresses corporate earnings and thus stock prices , but it buoys bond prices as interest rates fall . 
That unease is expected to grow today when the government reports on September durable goods orders and again Thursday when the first assessment of third-quarter economic growth is released . 
Analysts say they think durable goods orders fell about 1 % , compared with a 3.9 % gain in August , and that growth in the third quarter slowed to about 2.3 % from the second quarter 's 2.5 % . 
The stock market 's decline , coming after a record weekly gain of 119.88 points , surprised some investors . 
But A.C. Moore , director of research at Argus Research , said last week 's rally was a reflex reaction to the Oct. 13 stock market rout . 
Overall , he said , the trend in stock prices will be down as the economy weakens . 
`` We think we 're on target in looking for renewed economic deterioration , '' he said . 
`` Corporate profits are going to decrease faster than interest rates will fall , and the probability is that we 'll see negative economic growth in the fourth quarter . '' 
Hugh Johnson , chief investment officer at First Albany Corp. , agreed that a deteriorating economy is worrisome , but he said the real concern among stock investors is that some new problem will crop up in the junk bond market . 
In major market activity : Stock prices slumped in sluggish trading . 
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange totaled 135.9 million shares . 
Declining issues on the Big Board were ahead of gainers , 1,012 to 501 . 
Bond prices rallied . 
The yield on the Treasury 's benchmark 30-year bond slipped to 7.93 % . 
The dollar weakened against most other major currencies . 
In late New York trading , the dollar was quoted at 1.8470 marks and 141.90 yen , compared with 1.8578 marks and 142.43 yen late Friday . 
The Wall Street Journal `` American Way of Buying '' Survey consists of two separate , door-to-door nationwide polls conducted for the Journal by Peter D. Hart Research Associates and the Roper Organization . 
The two surveys , which asked different questions , were conducted using national random probability samples . 
The poll conducted by Peter D. Hart Research Associates interviewed 2,064 adults age 18 and older from June 15 to June 30 , 1989 . 
The poll conducted by the Roper Organization interviewed 2,002 adults age 18 and older from July 7 to July 15 , 1989 . 
Responses were weighted on the basis of age and gender to conform with U.S. Census data . 
For each poll , the odds are 19 out of 20 that if pollsters had sought to survey every household in the U.S. using the same questionnaire , the findings would differ from these poll results by no more than 2 1\/2 percentage points in either direction . 
The margin of error for subgroups -- for example , married women with children at home -- would be larger . 
In addition , in any survey , there is always the chance that other factors such as question wording could introduce errors into the findings . 
( See related story : `` The American Way of Buying : Is Buying a Car a Choice or a Chore ? -- 
Ironically , American Airlines ' attempt to lead industry prices higher was reported in the same issue as your survey showing that consumers had the least confidence in the airline industry ( Sept. 20 ) . 
You quote Robert Crandall , chairman of American 's parent , AMR Corp. , as having said that discount deals for big customers would be `` dumb '' because `` you will go to Detroit because you have to go to Detroit whether the fare is $ 175 , $ 275 or $ 375 . '' 
Even if Mr. Crandall is correct , he of all people must realize our society relies on competition to keep prices at a competitive level . 
In 1986 , he settled an antitrust suit based on a taped telephone conversation of him proposing to Braniff 's president that they both raise fares 20 % . 
( Braniff declined ) . 
When I asked American Airlines for its side of the story for use in my MBA class , where I teach business ethics , it did not respond . 
Perhaps the ethics of an industry 's leader filters down and is one of the factors that ultimately shapes consumer trust in that industry . 
Arnold Celnicker Assistant Professor Ohio State University 
Meredith Corp. is launching a new service to offer advertisers package deals combining its book , magazine and videocassette products . 
The Des Moines-based publisher said it created a new Custom Marketing Group that will offer advertisers special rates for combination packages in its magazines , such as Ladies Home Journal and Better Homes and Gardens . 
In addition , the group will create custom-designed media such as cookbooks , newspaper inserts and videos for ad campaigns . 
Earlier this year , Meredith sold its first such package for $ 3 million to Kraft Inc. , now a unit of New York-based Philip Morris Cos . 
The Kraft package included a specially published cookbook , a national free-standing insert in Sunday newspapers , and a Kraft `` advertorial '' section that ran in five Meredith magazines . 
Kraft recently agreed to spend an additional $ 3 million on similar programs through 1990 . 
Bill Murphy , director of the new marketing unit , said Meredith is negotiating other large-scale packages with leading companies in several product categories , but he would n't disclose their names . 
Sources close to the company and ad agencies that work with Meredith said leading advertisers in consumer electronics , packaged goods and automotive products were among those negotiating ad packages with the Meredith group . 
Other magazine publishing companies have been moving in the same direction . 
The New York Times Co. 's Magazine Group earlier this year began offering advertisers extensive merchandising services built around buying ad pages in its Golf Digest magazine . 
Time Warner Inc. recently formed a `` synergy department '' to seek out ways to offer advertisers packages that could combine Time 's magazines with Warner products such as videocassettes . 
Paul DuCharme , director of media services at Grey Advertising , said Meredith is the leader in providing multimedia packages . 
`` They may get passed up later when other publishers get their acts together , but for now they are the quickest offering the most extensive plan , '' he said . 
Mr. Murphy of Meredith said one advertiser , which he would n't identify , wants Meredith to provide ad pages in seven Meredith magazines , publish an interior-decorating book that will be distributed at point of purchase , give away a videotape on installation pointers , and possibly use Meredith 's Better Homes and Gardens ' residential real-estate agents to distribute discount-coupon books to new homeowners . 
`` Five years ago , magazine publishers would simply bid on an advertiser 's big ad schedule for their magazine , '' said Mr. Murphy . 
`` But the marketplace changed . 
Advertisers now say ` Help us improve our image and extend our selling season . ' 
They are coming to publishers looking for ideas . 
Your Sept. 21 article `` It 's So Easy to Get Burned When Buying a Small Firm '' was excellent . 
I 've been advising small businesses many years and have lived with the fact that 50 % will go out of business within two years , and 80 % in five years . 
The economic loss , jobs lost , anguish , frustration and humiliation are beyond measure . 
And most of these are absolutely unnecessary . 
Your article points out the traps people fall into , but when reviewing those traps one sees just about all of them could have been avoided . 
An accountant did not review the seller 's books before buying a business . 
`` I guess I was naive , '' he said . 
There is a more descriptive word to describe his lapse of common sense . 
Corporate managers who want to start their own business are the highest failure risks . 
They know all the answers and are not used to working more than 40 hours a week . 
The blue-collar worker who decides to start a business will listen and take advice . 
His humility gives him a much better chance of success . 
A few months ago your paper reported the results of a study to determine why Asians who arrive in this country without any money , and unable to speak English , become overnight successes . 
Their `` secret '' is that they gather a small group of advisers around them , listen to what they have to say , prepare a business plan and they are on their way . 
Successful American business owners do the same thing . 
Unfortunately , they are in the minority . 
Avoiding failure is easy . 
It 's unfortunate so many must learn the hard way . 
Daniel B. Scully Tucson , Ariz . 
The management turnover at Reebok International Ltd. continued with the resignation of company president C. Joseph LaBonte , who joined Reebok just two years ago . 
Mr. LaBonte 's departure follows by two months the resignation of Mark Goldston as senior vice president and chief marketing officer after only 11 months at Reebok . 
The resignations by the two executives , considered hard-charging and abrasive by Reebok insiders , reflect a difference in style with Paul Fireman , chairman and chief executive , according to several former executives . 
The two executives are among a number of outsiders recruited by Reebok in the past few years to help it make the transition from a small start-up company to a marketing giant with sales last year of $ 1.79 billion . 
The changes come as Reebok , which grew rapidly in the mid-1980s but has seen its sales flatten of late , is seeking to regain momentum in the athletic-shoe business against rivals Nike Inc. and L.A. Gear Inc . 
The departures , said Alice Ruth , an analyst at Montgomery Securities in San Francisco , should enable the company to focus on business issues instead of management differences . 
`` I think it 's more an issue of style . 
I would view it as a net positive . 
The company can go about its business . 
They 're in the midst of a turnaround , '' she noted . 
Earnings have rebounded in 1989 after a 20 % decline last year . 
A former executive agreed that the departures do n't reflect major problems , adding : `` If you see any company that grows as fast as Reebok did , it is going to have people coming and going . '' 
Reebok said Mr. LaBonte will resume the presidency of Vantage Group Inc. , a California-based venture capital firm that he founded in 1983 . 
Before that he was president and chief operating officer of Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corp . 
Reebok added that Mr. Fireman will assume the title of president . 
A spokesman said that neither Mr. Fireman nor Mr. LaBonte would be available for comment . 
`` We will not be commenting beyond the news release , '' the spokesman said . 
Mr. Goldston , who had been president of Faberge Inc. 's Faberge U.S.A. division before joining Reebok in September 1988 , left in August to pursue other interests . 
Magazine publishers are facing spiraling costs and a glut of new titles . 
But even a raft of recent failures is n't stopping them from launching new publications . 
At the American Magazine Conference here , publishers are plenty worried about the industry 's woes . 
But they are also talking about new magazines . 
For example , Toronto-based Telemedia Inc. will publish Eating Well , a new food and health magazine due out next summer . 
New York-based Hearst Corp. this fall plans to publish its first issue of 9 Months , a magazine for expectant mothers , and has already launched American Home . 
And Time Warner Inc. is developing a spinoff of Time magazine aimed at kids , on the heels of its successful Sports Illustrated for Kids . 
Over the past four years , the number of consumer magazines has increased by an average of 80 magazines annually , according to Donald Kummerfeld , president of the Magazine Publishers of America . 
`` This is an impressive show of faith in the future of the magazine industry , '' said Mr. Kummerfeld . 
`` Entrepreneurs do n't rush to get into a stagnant or declining industry . '' 
And despite the recent tough advertising climate , industry figures released at the meeting here indicate things may be turning around . 
For the first nine months , advertising pages in consumer magazines tracked by the Publishers Information Bureau increased 4 % from the same period last year , to 125,849 pages . 
Total magazine ad revenue for the same period increased 12 % to $ 4.6 billion . 
Though for some magazines categories a tough advertising climate persists , the industry in general is doing well compared with the newspaper industry . 
Though some magazines are thriving , the magazine publishing industry remains a risky business . 
Within the same nine months , News Corp. closed down In Fashion , a once-promising young woman 's fashion magazine , Drake Publications Inc. has folded the long-troubled Venture magazine , and Lang Communications has announced Ms. magazine , after 17 years , will no longer carry advertising as of January . 
Lang is cutting costs and will attempt to operate the magazine with only subscription revenue . 
Meanwhile , American Health Partners , publisher of American Health magazine , is deep in debt , and Owen Lipstein , founder and managing partner , is being forced to sell the magazine to Reader 's Digest Association Inc . 
Mr. Lipstein 's absence from the meeting here raised speculation that the sale is in trouble . 
Mr. Lipstein said in a telephone interview from New York that the sale was proceeding as planned . 
`` The magazine is strong . 
It 's simply the right time to do what we are doing , '' Mr. Lipstein said . 
`` Magazines can no longer be considered institutions , '' said James Autry , president of Meredith Corp. 's magazine group . 
`` Publishers will find that some magazines have served their purpose and should die , '' he added . 
`` Magazines could , like other brands , find that they have only a limited life . '' 
There are also indications that the number of magazine entrepreneurs , traditionally depended upon to break new ground with potentially risky start-ups , are dwindling . 
More than ever , independent magazines and small publishing groups are being gobbled up by larger publishing groups , such as American Express Publishing Corp. , a unit of American Express Co. , and Conde Nast Publications Inc. , a unit of Advance Publications Inc. , which are consolidating in order to gain leverage with advertisers . 
Some entrepreneurs are still active , though . 
Gerry Ritterman , president of New York-based Network Publishing Corp. , earlier this year sold his Soap Opera Digest magazine to Rupert Murdoch 's News Corp . 
Mr. Ritterman said that in the next six months he will take $ 50 million from the Soap Opera Digest sale to acquire new magazines . 
He would not reveal which magazines he is considering . 
`` The magazines I am looking for are underdeveloped , '' said Mr. Ritterman . 
`` They could be old or new , but they are magazines whose editorial quality needs to be improved . 
They will be the next hot magazines . 
MCA Inc. said its toy-making unit agreed to buy Buddy L Corp. , producer of a line of toy vehicles and preschool products . 
The price was n't disclosed , but an executive of LJN Toys Ltd. , the MCA unit , said the closely held Buddy L had annual sales in excess of $ 20 million . 
The 40-year-old Buddy L concern , based in New York , designs and develops toys under the names `` Buddy L '' and `` My First Buddy , '' he said . 
MCA said it expects the proposed transaction to be completed `` no later than Nov. 10 . 
( During its centennial year , The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history . ) 
FRANKLIN NATIONAL BANK DIED at 3 p.m. EDT , Oct. 8 , 1974 , and was promptly resurrected under new owners to shore up confidence in other banks during a recession . 
Arthur Burns , Federal Reserve Board chairman , said the government 's `` luck '' in keeping the bank open -- despite being the then-biggest U.S. bank failure -- prevented `` shock waves around the country and around the world . '' 
Federal officials who had been probing the bank for months arranged a merger with European-American Bank & Trust , owned by six foreign banks , to avert the closedown . 
And federal insurance protected the bank 's 631,163 depositors . 
The crisis had peaked on May 10 , 1974 , when the bank disclosed `` severe '' foreign-exchange losses due to `` unauthorized '' trading . 
Massive withdrawals followed and there was a brief rescue attempt , with political undertones , including $ 1.77 billion in Federal Reserve loans . 
Within six years many figures were convicted for their illegal abuse of Franklin funds . 
In June 1980 , Michele Sindona -- an Italian financier who in July 1972 had bought a 22 % block of Franklin 's stock from Loews Corp. , headed by Laurence A. Tisch -- was sentenced to 25 years in prison after being convicted of fraud and perjury . 
Included was the charge that Sindona siphoned $ 45 million of Franklin funds for his other ventures . 
( Sindona in 1979 faked his `` kidnapping '' for 2 1\/2 months to delay his trial . ) 
During 1976 to 1979 , other former Franklin officials either pleaded guilty to or were found guilty of violations including phony transactions to hide the bank 's losses . 
Sindona , the onetime Vatican financial adviser with reported links to the Mafia , died on March 22 , 1986 , at age 65 , reportedly after drinking cyanide-laced coffee in an Italian prison . 
It happened four days after he was sentenced to life in prison for ordering a 1979 murder . 
Italian magistrates labeled his death a suicide . 
In a nondescript office building south of Los Angeles , human behavior is being monitored , dissected and , ultimately , manipulated . 
A squiggly line snakes across a video screen , gyrating erratically as subjects with hand-held computers register their second-by-second reactions to a speaker 's remarks . 
Agreement , disapproval , boredom and distraction all can be inferred from the subjects ' twist of a dial . 
In another experiment , an elaborate chart with color codes reveals how people 's opinions were shaped -- and how they can be reshaped . 
Donald Vinson , who oversees the experiments , is n't some white-coated researcher . 
He heads Litigation Sciences Inc. , the nation 's largest legal consulting firm , which is helping corporate America prepare for high-stakes litigation by predicting and shaping jurors ' reactions . 
In the process , Litigation Sciences is quietly but inexorably reshaping the world of law . 
Little known outside the legal world but a powerhouse within , Litigation Sciences , a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi PLC , employs more than 100 psychologists , sociologists , marketers , graphic artists and technicians . 
Twenty-one of its workers are Ph. D.s . 
Among other services , the firm provides pre-trial opinion polls , creates profiles of `` ideal '' jurors , sets up mock trials and `` shadow '' juries , coaches lawyers and witnesses , and designs courtroom graphics . 
Much like their cohorts in political consulting and product marketing , the litigation advisers encourage their clients to play down complex or ambiguous matters , simplify their messages and provide their target audiences with a psychological craving to make the desired choice . 
With jury verdicts getting bigger all the time , companies are increasingly willing to pay huge sums for such advice . 
Recently , Litigation Sciences helped Pennzoil Co. win a $ 10.5 billion jury verdict against Texaco Inc . 
It advised the National Football League in its largely successful defense of antitrust charges by the United States Football League . 
And it helped win defense verdicts in product-liability suits involving scores of products , ranging from Firestone 500 tires to the anti-nausea drug Bendectin . 
Largely as a result , Litigation Sciences has more than doubled in size in the past two years . 
Its 1988 revenue was $ 25 million . 
Meanwhile , competitors are being spawned almost daily ; some 300 new businesses -- many just one-person shops -- have sprung up . 
Mr. Vinson estimates the industry 's total revenues approach $ 200 million . 
In any high-stakes case , you can be sure that one side or the other -- or even both -- is using litigation consultants . 
Despite their ubiquity , the consultants are n't entirely welcome . 
Some lawyers and scholars see the social scientists ' vision of the American jury system as a far cry from the ideal presented in civics texts and memorialized on the movie screen . 
In the film classic `` Twelve Angry Men , '' the crucible of deliberations unmasks each juror 's bias and purges it from playing a role in the verdict . 
After hours of conflict and debate , that jury focuses on the facts with near-perfect objectivity . 
In real life , jurors may not always work that way , but some court observers question why they should n't be encouraged to do so rather than be programmed not to . 
Litigation consulting is , as New York trial attorney Donald Zoeller puts it , `` highly manipulative . '' 
He adds , `` The notion they try to sell is that juries do n't make decisions rationally . 
But the effort is also being made to try and cause jurors not to decide things rationally . 
I find it troubling . '' 
But Mr. Zoeller also acknowledges that consultants can be very effective . 
`` It 's gotten to the point where if the case is large enough , it 's almost malpractice not to use them , '' he says . 
Others complain that the consultants ' growing influence exacerbates the advantage of litigants wealthy enough to afford such pricey services . 
`` The affluent people and the corporations can buy it , the poor radicals { in political cases } get it free , and everybody in between is at a disadvantage , and that 's not the kind of system we want , '' says Amitai Etzioni , a prominent sociologist who teaches at George Washington University . 
Sophisticated trial consulting grew , ironically , from the radical political movements of the 1960s and 1970s before finding its more lucrative calling in big commercial cases . 
The Harrisburg 7 trial in 1972 , in which Daniel Berrigan and others were charged with plotting anti-war-related violence , was a landmark . 
In that case , a group of left-leaning sociologists interviewed 252 registered voters around Harrisburg . 
The researchers discovered that Episcopalians , Presbyterians , Methodists and fundamantalist Protestants were nearly always against the defendants ; the lawyers resolved to try to keep them off the jury . 
The defense also learned that college-educated people were uncharacteristically conservative about the Vietnam War . 
A more blue-collar panel became a second aim . 
Ultimately , that carefully picked jury deadlocked with a 10-2 vote to acquit , and the prosecution decided not to retry the case . 
Litigation consulting had arrived . 
The fledgling science went corporate in 1977 when International Business Machines Corp. hired a marketing professor to help defend a complex antitrust case . 
The problem for IBM trial lawyers Thomas Barr and David Boies was how to make such a highly technical case understandable . 
As the trial progressed , they were eager to know if the jury was keeping up with them . 
The solution devised by the professor was to hire six people who would mirror the actual jury demographically , sit in on the trial and report their reactions to him . 
He then briefed Messrs. Boies and Barr , who had the chance to tilt their next day 's presentation accordingly . 
Thus , the `` shadow '' jury was born . 
Mr. Vinson , the professor , got the law bug and formed Litigation Sciences . 
( IBM won the case . ) 
`` The hardest thing in any complex case is to retain objectivity and , in some sense , your ignorance , '' says Mr. Boies of Cravath , Swaine & Moore . 
`` What you look for in a shadow jury is very much what you do when you give an opening argument to your wife or a friend and get some response to it . 
A shadow jury is a way to do that in a more systematic and organized way . '' 
The approach worked well in the recent antitrust case in which Energy Transportation Systems Inc. sued Santa Fe Pacific Corp. over the transport of semi-liquefied coal -- the kind of case likely to make almost anyone 's eyes glaze over . 
Energy Transportation retained Litigation Sciences , at a cost of several hundred thousand dollars , to poll , pre-try , profile and shadow . 
Just before the actual closing arguments , the firm put the case to a vote of the five shadow jurors , each of whom was being paid $ 150 a day . 
The jurors , who did n't know which side had retained them , decided for Energy Transportation , and awarded $ 500 million in damages . 
The real jury returned days later with a $ 345 million victory for Energy Transportation . 
`` It 's just like weather forecasting , '' says Energy Transportation trial attorney Harry Reasoner of Vinson & Elkins . 
`` It 's often wrong , but it 's better than consulting an Indian rain dancer . '' 
Forecasting is only one part of Litigation Sciences ' work . 
Changing the outcome of the trial is what really matters . 
And to the uninitiated , some of the firm 's approaches may seem chillingly manipulative . 
Theoretically , jurors are supposed to weigh the evidence in a case logically and objectively . 
Instead , Mr. Vinson says , interviews with thousands of jurors reveal that they start with firmly entrenched attitudes and try to shoe-horn the facts of the case to fit their views . 
Pre-trial polling helps the consultants develop a profile of the right type of juror . 
If it is a case in which the client seeks punitive damages , for example , depressed , underemployed people are far more likely to grant them . 
Someone with a master 's degree in classical arts who works in a deli would be ideal , Litigation Sciences advises . 
So would someone recently divorced or widowed . 
( Since Litigation Sciences generally represents the defense , its job is usually to help the lawyers identify and remove such people from the jury . ) 
For personal-injury cases , Litigation Sciences seeks defense jurors who believe that most people , including victims , get what they deserve . 
Such people also typically hold negative attitudes toward the physically handicapped , the poor , blacks and women . 
The consultants help the defense lawyers find such jurors by asking questions about potential jurors ' attitudes toward volunteer work , or toward particular movies or books . 
Litigation Sciences does n't make moral distinctions . 
If a client needs prejudiced jurors , the firm will help find them . 
As Mr. Vinson explains it , `` We do n't control the facts . 
They are what they are . 
But any lawyer will select the facts and the strategy to employ . 
In our system of advocacy , the trial lawyer is duty bound to present the best case he possibly can . '' 
Once a jury is selected , the consultants often continue to determine what the jurors ' attitudes are likely to be and help shape the lawyers ' presentation accordingly . 
Logic plays a minimal role here . 
More important are what LSI calls `` psychological anchors '' -- a few focal points calculated to appeal to the jury on a gut level . 
In one personal-injury case , a woman claimed she had been injured when she slipped in a pool , but the fall did n't explain why one of her arms was discolored bluish . 
By repeatedly drawing the jury 's attention to the arm , the defense lawyers planted doubt about the origin of the woman 's injuries . 
The ploy worked . 
The defense won . 
In a classic defense of a personal-injury case , the consultants concentrate on encouraging the jury to shift the blame . 
`` The ideal defense in a case involving an accident is to persuade the jurors to hold the accident victim responsible for his or her plight , '' Mr. Vinson has written . 
Slick graphics , pre-tested for effectiveness , also play a major role in Litigation Sciences ' operation . 
Studies show , the consultants say , that people absorb information better and remember it longer if they receive it visually . 
Computer-generated videos help . 
`` The average American watches seven hours of TV a day . 
They are very visually sophisticated , '' explains LSI graphics specialist Robert Seltzer . 
Lawyers remain divided about whether anything is wrong with all this . 
Supporters acknowledge that the process aims to manipulate , but they insist that the best trial lawyers have always employed similar tactics . 
`` They may not have been able to articulate it all , but they did it , '' says Stephen Gillers , a legal ethics expert at New York University law school . 
`` What you have here is intuition made manifest . '' 
Many lawyers maintain that all 's fair in the adversary system as long as no one tampers with the evidence . 
Others point out that lawyers in small communities have always had a feel for public sentiment -- and used that to advantage . 
Litigation consulting is n't a guarantee of a favorable outcome . 
Litigation Sciences concedes that in one in 20 cases it was flatout wrong in its predictions . 
A few attorneys offer horror stories of jobs botched by consultants or of overpriced services -- as when one lawyer paid a consultant ( not at Litigation Sciences ) $ 70,000 to interview a jury after a big trial and later read more informative interviews with the same jurors in The American Lawyer magazine . 
Some litigators scoff at the notion that a sociologist knows more than they do about what makes a jury tick . 
`` The essence of being a trial lawyer is understanding how people of diverse backgrounds react to you and your presentation , '' says Barry Ostrager of Simpson Thacher & Bartlett , who recently won a huge case on behalf of insurers against Shell Oil Co . 
He says he used consultants in the case but `` found them to be virtually useless . '' 
But most lawyers accept that the marketplace has spoken . 
And the question remains whether the jury system can maintain its integrity while undergoing such a skillful massage . 
For more than a decade , Mr. Etzioni , the sociologist , has been a leading critic of the masseurs . 
`` There 's no reason to believe that juries rule inappropriately , '' he says . 
`` But the last thing you want to do is manipulate the subconscious to make them think better . 
What you then do is you make them think inappropriately . '' 
To hamper the work of litigation scientists , he suggests that courts sharply limit the number of jurors that lawyers can remove from the jury panel through so-called peremptory challenges -- exclusions that do n't require explanations . 
In most civil cases , judges allow each side three such challenges . 
For complex cases , judges sometimes allow many more . 
Mr. Etzioni also suggests forbidding anyone from gathering background information about the jurors . 
( Some courts release names and addresses , and researchers can drive by houses , look up credit ratings , and even question neighbors . ) 
Furthermore , he says , psychologists should not be allowed to analyze jurors ' personalities . 
Even some lawyers who have used consultants to their advantage see a need to limit their impact . 
Mr. Boies , the first lawyer to use Mr. Vinson 's services , cautions against courts ' allowing extensive jury questioning ( known as voir dire ) or giving out personal information about the jurors . 
`` The more extensive the voir dire , the easier you make it for that kind of research to be effective , and I do n't think courts should lend themselves to that , '' Mr. Boies says . 
Silicon Graphics Inc. , a fast-growing maker of computer workstations , said it landed two federal government contracts worth more than $ 100 million over the next five years . 
One award is part of a Department of Defense contract to Loral Rolm Mil-Spec Computers and could be valued at more than $ 100 million over five years . 
The other involves the sale of about 35 of the company 's high-end workstations to the National Institutes of Health . 
The models , which cost about $ 75,000 each , will be used in research . 
The awards are evidence that Silicon Graphics ' approach to computer graphics is catching on with users of powerful desktop computers , analysts said . 
`` The company 's on a roll , '' said Robert Herwick , an analyst at Hambrecht & Quist . 
`` No other { computer } vendor offers graphics performance that good for their price . '' 
In the battle to supply desktop computers for researchers and design engineers , most of the attention is given to the biggest competitors : Sun Microsystems Inc. , Hewlett-Packard Co. and Digital Equipment Corp. , which make computers mainly aimed at a wide range of engineering and scientific needs . 
Silicon Graphics , on the other hand , has targeted a specific niche since its inception in 1982 , which has been dubbed by some as `` motion-picture computing . '' 
This is a style of `` visual '' computing that provides three-dimensional , color models of everything from the inside of a house to the latest in women 's fashion . 
Though Silicon Graphics is much smaller than Digital , Hewlett and Sun , it has emerged in recent years as a feared adversary in this graphics portion of the workstation market . 
In addition , the company has made it tough on competitors by offering a stream of desktop computers at sharply lower prices . 
A year ago , Silicon Graphics introduced a model priced at $ 15,000 -- almost as cheap as mainstream workstations that do n't offer special graphics features . 
Silicon Graphics also plans to unveil even less expensive machines in the near future . 
`` It 's pretty safe to assume we can bring the cost down of these systems by 30 % to 40 % a year , '' said Edward McCracken , the company 's chief executive officer . 
Silicon Graphics ' strategy seems to be paying off . 
Revenue for its first quarter ended Sept. 30 was $ 86.4 million , a 95 % increase over the year-ago period . 
Profit was $ 5.2 million , compared with $ 1 million for the year-ago quarter . 
Remember those bulky , thick-walled refrigerators of 30 years ago ? 
They , or at least something less efficient than today 's thin-walled units , may soon be making a comeback . 
That something , whatever it is , could add as much as $ 100 to the $ 600 or so consumers now pay for lower-priced refrigerators . 
These and other expensive changes in products ranging from auto air conditioners to foam cushioning to commercial solvents are in prospect because of something called the Montreal Protocol , signed by 24 nations in 1987 . 
In one of the most sweeping environmental regulatory efforts to date -- involving products with an annual value of $ 135 billion in the U.S. alone -- the signatories agreed to curtail sharply the use of chlorofluorocarbons ( CFCs ) . 
World-wide production would be cut in half by 1998 . 
The U.S. Senate liked the treaty so well it ratified it by a vote of 89 to 0 . 
Not to be outdone , George Bush wants CFCs banished altogether by the year 2000 , a goal endorsed at an 80-nation U.N. environmental meeting in Helsinki in the spring . 
That 's a lot of banishment , as it turns out . 
CFCs are the primary ingredient in a gas , often referred to by the Du Pont trade name Freon , which is compressed to liquid form to serve as the cooling agent in refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment . 
Gases containing CFCs are pumped into polyurethane to make the foam used in pillows , upholstery and insulation . 
Polyurethane foam is a highly efficient insulator , which accounts for why the walls of refrigerators and freezers can be thinner now than they were back in the days when they were insulated with glass fiber . 
But even though by some estimates it might cost the world as much as $ 100 billion between now and the year 2000 to convert to other coolants , foaming agents and solvents and to redesign equipment for these less efficient substitutes , the Montreal Protocol 's legions of supporters say it is worth it . 
They insist that CFCs are damaging the earth 's stratospheric ozone layer , which screens out some of the sun 's ultraviolet rays . 
Hence , as they see it , if something is n't done earthlings will become ever more subject to sunburn and skin cancer . 
Peter Teagan , a specialist in heat transfer , is running a project at Arthur D. Little Inc. , of Cambridge , Mass. , to find alternative technologies that will allow industry to eliminate CFCs . 
In addition to his interest in ozone depletion he has extensively studied the related topic of global warming , a theory that mankind 's generation of carbon dioxide through increased combustion of fossil fuels is creating a `` greenhouse effect '' that will work important climatic changes in the earth 's atmosphere over time . 
`` I would be the first to admit that there is not a complete consensus in the scientific community on either one of these problems , '' says Mr. Teagan . 
`` In the kind of literature I read I come across countervailing opinions quite frequently . 
But the nature of the problem is such that many others feel it has to be addressed soon , before all the evidence is in . 
We ca n't afford to wait . '' 
But does it have to be so soon ? 
Some atmospheric scientists think that even if CFCs were released into the atmosphere at an accelerating rate , the amount of ozone depletion would be only 10 % by the middle of the next century . 
It 's easy to get something comparable by simply moving to a higher altitude in the U.S. . 
Moreover , there are questions , particularly among atmospheric scientists who know this subject best , about the ability of anyone to know what in fact is happening to the ozone layer . 
It is generally agreed that when CFCs rise from earth to stratosphere , the chlorine in them is capable of interfering with the process through which ultraviolet rays split oxygen molecules and form ozone . 
But ozone creation is a very large-scale natural process and the importance of human-generated CFCs in reducing it is largely a matter of conjecture . 
The ozone layer is constantly in motion and thus very hard to measure . 
What scientists have known since the late 1970s is that there is a hole in the layer over Antarctica that expands or contracts from year to year . 
But it is at least worthy of some note that there are very few refrigerators in Antarctica . 
Moreover , surely someone has noticed that household refrigerators are closed systems , running for many years without either the CFC gas or the insulation ever escaping . 
Another argument of the environmentalists is that if substitutes are available , why not use them ? 
Mr. Teagan cites a list of substitutes but none , so far , match the nonflammable , nontoxic CFCs . 
Butane and propane can be used as coolants , for example , but are flammable . 
Moreover , new lubricants will be needed to protect compressors from the new formulations , which , as with CFCs , are solvents . 
Mr. Teagan points out as well that if the equipment designed to get along without CFCs is less efficient than current devices , energy consumption will rise and that will worsen the greenhouse effect . 
Folks in the Midwest who just suffered a mid-October snowstorm may wonder where the greenhouse was when they needed it , but let 's not be flippant about grave risks . 
As it happens , Arthur D. Little is not at all interested in throwing cold water on ozone depletion and global warming theories . 
It is interested in making some money advising industry on how to convert to a world without CFCs . 
There is , after all , big money in environmentalism . 
Maybe we should ask why it was that Du Pont so quickly capitulated and issued a statement , giving it wide publicity , that it was withdrawing CFCs . 
Freon , introduced in 1930 , revolutionized America by making refrigeration and air conditioning practical after all . 
One answer is that big companies are growing weary of fighting environmental movements and are trying instead to cash in on them , although they never care to put it quite that way . 
Du Pont , as it happens , has a potential substitute for CFCs . 
Imperial Chemical Industries of the U.K. also has one , and is building a plant in Louisiana to produce it . 
Japanese chemical companies are at work developing their own substitutes and hoping to conquer new markets , of course . 
There are still others who do n't mind seeing new crises arise . 
Environmental groups would soon go out of business were they not able to send out mailings describing the latest threat and asking for money to fight it . 
University professors and consultants with scientific credentials saw a huge market for their services evaporate when price decontrol destroyed the energy crisis and thus the demand for `` alternative energy . '' 
They needed new crises to generate new grants and contracts . 
In other words , environmentalism has created a whole set of vested interests that fare better when there are many problems than when there are few . 
That tends to tilt the public debate toward `` solutions '' even when some of the most knowledgeable scientists are skeptical about the seriousness of the threats and the insistence of urgency . 
There is an element of make-work involved . 
Consumers pay the bill for all this in the price of a refrigerator or an air-conditioned car . 
If they were really getting insurance against environmental disaster , the price would be cheap . 
But if there is no impending threat , it can get to be very expensive . 
but worries about 1990 . 
With most legislatures adjourned for the year , small business is tallying its scorecard . 
Much of its attention was spent fighting organized labor 's initiatives on issues the small-business community traditionally opposes -- from raising state minimum wage levels to mandating benefits in health plans . 
While results were mixed in many states , `` small business got by fairly well , '' concludes Don L. Robinson , associate director of the National Federation of Independent Business , the largest small-business organization . 
Five states -- Oregon , Rhode Island , New Hampshire , Iowa and Wisconsin -- passed bills to boost the minimum wage , but measures in 19 other states were defeated . 
Oregon 's rate will rise to $ 4.75 an hour , the nation 's highest , in Jan. 1 , 1991 . 
Iowa 's will be the second highest -- at $ 4.65 an hour in January 1992 -- but small-business lobbyists won an exclusion for tiny concerns and a lower training rate . 
In 17 central states , one small-business count shows lawmakers adopted only three of 46 bills mandating health coverage or parental leave . 
The Illinois Legislature narrowly passed a parental-leave bill , which Gov. James Thompson vetoed , and Iowa and Tennessee amended laws to require that employers pay for breast-cancer exams . 
Small business is bracing for an avalanche of similar proposals next year . 
`` Those kinds of issues always keep coming back , '' says Robert Beckwith , who manages the Illinois Chamber of Commerce 's small-business office . 
DESPITE VICTORIES this year , small business fears losing parental-leave war . 
Only two states -- Vermont and Washington -- this year joined five others requiring private employers to grant leaves of absence to employees with newborn or adopted infants . 
Similar proposals were defeated in at least 15 other states . 
But small business , which generally detests government-mandated benefits , has taken note of the growing number of close votes . 
`` It 's just a matter of time before the tide turns , '' says one Midwestern lobbyist . 
Consequently , small business is taking more `` pro-active '' steps to counter mandated leaves . 
In Pennsylvania , small businesses are pushing for a voluntary alternative ; they favor a commission that would develop sample leave policies that employers could adopt . 
They also support a tax credit for employers to offset the cost of hiring and training workers who temporarily replace employees on parental leave . 
In 1990 , the issue is expected to be especially close in Alaska , California , Michigan , New York , Pennsylvania and Illinois . 
`` We 'll be playing a lot of defense , especially in the Midwest and Northeast , '' says Jim Buente of the NFIB . 
IN LOS ANGELES , more small businesses ponder adopting a child-care policy . 
Triggering the re-examination is a recent city council decision to give preference in letting city contracts to suppliers with a stated policy on child care for their employees . 
The preferential treatment even applies to awarding small contracts under $ 25,000 and consulting and temporary services -- which often go to the smaller concerns . 
Firms are permitted wide flexibility in the child-care arrangements they provide . 
Council member Joy Picus , the measure 's chief advocate , considers it part of a `` pro-family policy '' that makes Los Angeles a leader in `` humanizing the workplace . '' 
NOVEMBER BALLOTS will contain few referendum or initiative issues that especially affect small business . 
In San Francisco , small businesses are urging passage of a local initiative to build a new $ 95 million downtown baseball stadium ; they believe it will spur retail sales and hotel-restaurant business . 
But in Washington state , small business generally opposes an initiative to boost spending on children 's programs by $ 360 million , fearing the state 's 7.8 % sales tax will be raised to finance the outlays . 
DIALING DOLLARS : 
Small businesses in suburban Chicago are discovering that an area-code switch Nov. 11 -- to 708 from the familiar 312 -- wo n't be without some costs as they alter stationery , among other things , and notify customers . 
Wessels & Pautsch , a small St. Charles law firm , plans to mail 500 customers a list of its lawyers ' new phone and fax numbers as well as updated Rolodex cards . 
But many owners plan to practice frugality -- crossing out the old code and writing in the new one until their stock runs out . 
Even print-shop operator Clay Smith of Naperville wo n't discard his old supply . 
( He reports his business is up slightly from customers replacing old stock . ) 
CALIFORNIA , A TREND-SETTER in franchising rules , stirs a controversy . 
With some new rules , state officials say they made it easier -- and faster -- to sell new franchises whose terms stray from those in state-registered contracts . 
Previously , regulators insisted that franchisers pre-register such changes with the state -- a costly process taking at least six weeks . 
Now some negotiated sales that meet a series of tests do n't have to be pre-registered . 
For instance , franchisers no longer must pre-register sales to aspiring franchisees who qualify as `` sophisticated purchasers . '' 
Such buyers must have a minimum net worth of $ 1 million , $ 200,000 annual income , or recent experience in the business area of the franchise being sold . 
But critics consider the changes regressive . 
Lewis G. Rudnick , a Chicago lawyer who represents franchisers , contends California is narrowly limiting -- rather than expanding -- opportunities for negotiating sales . 
He argues California regulators historically have misinterpreted their law -- and he says negotiated sales that are n't pre-registered have been legal all along . 
San Francisco lawyer Timothy H. Fine , who represents franchisees , insists California 's cautiousness helps protect franchisees from crafty sales negotiators who push unlawful clauses . 
SMALL TALK : 
A new Maryland law frees store owners of liability if a customer trips or otherwise gets hurt on the way to the restroom ... . 
Only 4 % of Missouri small businesses surveyed say they 've tested an employee or applicant for drug or alcohol use ... . 
By 52%-36 % , Tennessee NFIB members favor laws to limit foreign ownership of land and facilities in the state . 
About 400,000 commuters trying to find their way through the Bay area 's quake-torn transportation system wedged cheek-to-jowl into subways , sat in traffic jams on major freeways or waited forlornly for buses yesterday . 
In other words , it was a better-than-average Manhattan commute . 
City officials feared widespread gridlock on the first day that normal business operations were resumed following last Tuesday 's earthquake . 
The massive temblor , which killed at least 61 people , severed the Bay Bridge , a major artery to the east , and closed most ramps leading to and from Highway 101 , the biggest artery to the south . 
It will take several weeks to repair the bridge , and several months to repair some of the 101 connections . 
But in spite of a wind-driven rainstorm , gridlock never materialized , mainly because the Bay Area Rapid Transit subway system carried 50 % more passengers than normal . 
For the first time in memory , it was standing-room only in BART 's sleek , modern railcars . 
Moreover , the two main bridges still connecting San Francisco with the East Bay did n't charge tolls , allowing traffic to zip through without stopping . 
Officials also suspect that traffic benefited from steps by major employers to get workers to come in at odd hours , or that many workers are still staying at home . 
Many commuters who normally drove across the Bay Bridge , which is shut down for several weeks because of damage to one span , actually may have reached work a bit faster on BART yesterday , provided they could find a parking space at the system 's jammed stations . 
In the best of times , the Bay Bridge is the worst commute in the region , often experiencing back-ups of 20 to 30 minutes or more . 
Not that getting into town was easy . 
Storm flooding caused back-ups on the freeway , and many commuters had to find rides to BART 's stations , because parking lots were full before dawn . 
Bus schedules were sometimes in disarray , stranding commuters such as Marilyn Sullivan . 
Her commute from Petaluma , Calif. , normally takes an hour and 15 minutes , via the Golden Gate Bridge , which connects San Francisco with the North Bay area . 
Yesterday , she was still waiting at a bus stop after three hours , trying to transfer to a bus going to the financial district . 
`` It 's worse than I thought , '' she said . 
`` I do n't know where all the buses are . '' 
But while traffic was heavy early in the commute over the Golden Gate , by 8 a.m. it already had thinned out . 
`` It 's one of the smoothest commutes I 've ever had , '' said Charles Catania , an insurance broker on the bus from Mill Valley in Marin County . 
`` It looks like a holiday . 
I think a lot of people got scared and stayed home . '' 
However , a spokeswoman for BankAmerica Corp. said yesterday 's absenteeism at the bank holding company was no greater than on an average day . 
At the San Mateo Bridge , which connects the San Francisco peninsula with the East Bay , police were surprised at the speed with which traffic moved . 
`` Everybody pretty much pitched in and cooperated , '' said Stan Perez , a sergeant with the California Highway Patrol . 
There were many indications that the new work hours implemented by major corporations played a big role . 
The Golden Gate handled as many cars as normally yesterday , but over four hours rather than the usual two-hour crush . 
Bechtel Group Inc. , the giant closely held engineering concern , says it has instituted a 6 a.m. to 8 p.m. flextime arrangement , whereby employees may select any eight-hour period during those hours to go to work . 
Of Bechtel 's 17,500 employees , about 4,000 work in San Francisco -- one-third of them commuting from stricken East Bay . 
Pacific Gas & Electric Co. is offering its 6,000 San Francisco employees a two-tier flextime schedule -- either 6 a.m. to 2 p.m. or 10 a.m. to 6 p.m . 
The flextime may cut by almost a third the number of PG&E employees working conventional 9-5 hours , a spokesman says . 
Some of the utility 's employees may opt for a four-day workweek , 10 hours a day , to cut the commute by 20 % . 
At Pacific Telesis Group , flextime is left up to individual working groups , because some of the telephone company 's employees must be on-site during normal business hours , a spokeswoman says . 
Some individuals went to some lengths on their own to avoid the anticipated gridlock . 
One senior vice president at Bechtel said he got up at 3 a.m. to drive into San Francisco from the East Bay . 
But transportation officials worry that such extraordinary measures and cooperation may not last . 
Although one transportation official said drivers who did n't use car pools were committing `` an anti-social act , '' about two-thirds of the motorists crossing the Golden Gate were alone , compared with the normal 70 % rate . 
And some commuters , relieved by the absence of gridlock , were planning to return to their old ways . 
Garry Kasparov went to combat Sunday with the world 's most advanced chess computer and kicked it around -- symbolically , anyway -- like an old tin can . 
Playing black in the first game , the human champion maneuvered Deep Thought , known for its attacking prowess , into a totally passive position . 
Then he unleashed his own , unstoppable , attack . 
And in the second game , with Mr. Kasparov advancing ferociously as white , D.T. offered feeble resistance and lost even faster . 
Well , mankind can rest easier for now . 
Though almost everybody at the playing site had been looking for the 26-year-old Soviet to beat the Pennsylvania-based computer , he gave the machine a far worse drubbing than many expected . 
And when Mr. Kasparov strode into the playing hall , he called the outcome . 
As if he were Iron Mike , about to enter the ring with a 98-pound weakling , he declared : `` I 'll be able to beat any computer for the next five years . '' 
His strategy against D.T. was based on a thorough study of dozens of its games , he said , including its notorious whippings of the grandmasters Bent Larsen of Denmark and Robert Byrne of the U.S. . 
Mr. Kasparov was underwhelmed . 
`` The computer 's mind is too straight , too primitive , '' lacking the intuition and creativity needed to reach the top , he said . 
The champion apparently was not worried at all about D.T. 's strong points . 
Its chief builder , Taiwan-born Feng-hsiung Hsu , nicknamed his brainchild `` the Weasel '' for its tactical flair at wriggling out of horrible positions . 
D.T. also has a prodigious and flawless memory , is utterly fearless , and could n't be distracted by the sexy nude sculptures spread around the playing hall , in the New York Academy of Art . 
In fact , D.T. never left home , Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh , but communicated with its human handlers by telephone link . 
They conceded that the odds favored Mr. Kasparov , but they put their hope in D.T. 's recently enhanced capacity for examining positions -- up to a million per second , from 720,000 . 
But the handlers mistakenly stuck with silicon chips ; they needed kryptonite . 
This became apparent as game one , a Sicilian Defense by Mr. Kasparov , proceeded . 
No human can examine millions of moves , but Mr. Kasparov , using his ineffably powerful brain , consistently found very good ones . 
After eight moves by each side , the board was the same as in a game in which Nigel Short of Great Britain fought the champion to a draw in 1980 . 
But the computer did n't play Mr. Short 's ninth move , a key pawn thrust , and its position deteriorated rapidly . 
Instead of castling , a standard measure to safeguard the king , D.T. made a second-rate rook maneuver at move 13 ; then it put a knight offside on move 16 . 
`` Only two classes of minds would think of this -- very weak human players , and computers , '' said Edmar Mednis , the expert commentator for the match , which was attended by hundreds of chess fans . 
By move 21 , D.T. had fallen into a deep positional trap . 
It allowed Mr. Kasparov to exchange his dark-squared bishop for one of D.T. 's knights . 
Bishops usually are worth slightly more than knights , but in this case Mr. Kasparov was left with a very dangerous knight and D.T. 's surviving bishop was reduced to passivity . 
Indeed , it looked more like a pawn , a `` tall pawn , '' as spectators snidely put it . 
Consistently , D.T. was over-optimistic about its chances , which it continually sized up , in numerical form . 
When most spectators thought its position hopeless , the computer thought it was only , in effect , one-half of a pawn down . 
Such evaluations met with derision , and kept the machine from resigning as soon as humans would have -- prompting more derision . 
While D.T. shuffled its king back and forth in a defensive crouch , Mr. Kasparov maneuvered the knight to a dominant outpost . 
He also launched a kingside storm , sacrificing a pawn to denude D.T. 's king . 
No amount of weasling could have saved this game for D.T . 
A piece down , the computer resigned . 
Now , with the crowd in the analysis room smelling figurative blood , the only question seemed to be how fast Mr. Kasparov could win game two . 
With the advantage of playing white ( which moves first ) , Mr. Kasparov followed up cleverly against the computer 's defense , a Queen 's Gambit Accepted . 
As early as move six , Mr. Kasparov deviated from a well-known sequence of moves , developing a knight instead of making a standard bishop attack against the computer 's advanced knight . 
This left the computer with a broader range of plausible replies -- and it immediately blundered by moving a queenside pawn , to the neglect of kingside development . 
`` In a new position just after the opening , a computer will have serious problems , '' Mr. Kasparov said later . 
In such positions , he explained , `` you have to create something new , and the computer is n't able to do that right now . '' 
After only 11 moves for each side , the computer 's position was shaky . 
Greedily , it grabbed a pawn , at the cost of facing a brutal attack . 
And when a defensive move was called for , D.T. passed up an obvious pawn move and instead exposed its queen to immediate tactical threats . 
Mr. Kasparov remarked later that `` even a weak club player '' would have avoided the queen move . 
Now , after only a dozen moves , spectators were looking for a mating combination . 
On a demonstration board , emcee Shelby Lyman showed a quick kill initiated by a knight sacrifice ; no spectator refuted this line of play . 
Mr. Kasparov 's continuation was slower but , in the end , just as deadly . 
He won D.T. 's queen for two minor pieces and two pawns -- not enough compensation , in this position , to give the computer much hope . 
In a hopeless position , the computer resigned rather than make its 37th move . 
And Mr. Kasparov , to cheers and applause , marched back into the analysis room . 
`` In both games I got exactly what I wanted , '' he said . 
What he had demonstrated , he added , is that there 's more to chess than sheer calculation . 
Undeterred , D.T. 's handlers vowed to press on . 
Indeed , three of them will be building a successor machine for International Business Machines Corp . 
Promises Feng-hsiung Hsu : `` In three years we 'll mount a better challenge . '' 
Mr. Tannenbaum is a reporter in the Journal 's New York bureau . 
Reaching for that extra bit of yield can be a big mistake -- especially if you do n't understand what you 're investing in . 
Just ask Richard Blumenfeld , a New Jersey dentist who considers himself `` a reasonably sophisticated investor . '' 
In May 1986 , Dr. Blumenfeld gave Merrill Lynch & Co. about $ 40,000 for a federally insured certificate of deposit offering an effective yield of more than 9 % . 
`` It was a time when interest rates came down very rapidly , '' Dr. Blumenfeld recalls . 
Yields on five-year CDs at major banks were averaging about 7.45 % , and 10-year Treasury notes were paying less than 8 % . 
The CD seemed like a great deal . 
But nearly 3 1\/2 years later , Merrill says the investment is worth about $ 43,000 -- an amount that represents an annual return of just over 2 % on Dr. Blumenfeld 's $ 40,000 . 
The problem is that the CD he bought for a retirement plan was n't a plain vanilla CD . 
Instead , his Merrill broker put him in a zero-coupon CD , which is sold at a deep discount to its face value . 
The difference between the price and the face value payable at maturity is the investor 's return . 
More important , the CD was purchased on the secondary , or resale , market . 
Because the CD had an effective yield of 13.4 % when it was issued in 1984 , and interest rates in general had declined sharply since then , part of the price Dr. Blumenfeld paid was a premium -- an additional amount on top of the CD 's base value plus accrued interest that represented the CD 's increased market value . 
Now the thrift that issued the CD is insolvent , and Dr. Blumenfeld has learned to his surprise that the premium is n't insured under federal deposit insurance . 
The tip-off came when he opened a recent Merrill Lynch statement and found that the CD 's `` estimated current market value '' had plummeted by $ 9,000 in a month . 
Several phone calls and a visit to his broker 's office later , the dentist found out that the $ 9,000 drop represented the current value of the premium he paid when he bought the CD , and that the amount was n't insured . 
`` This is one thing I was never aware of , '' he says . 
He assumed that principal and interest were `` fully insured up to $ 100,000 , '' he adds . 
Dr. Blumenfeld is n't unique . 
Especially at times like these , when declining rates make it hard for investors to get yields they have come to expect , too many people chase the promise of above-market returns without fully appreciating the risk . 
`` Yield greed often gets in the way of understanding things , '' says John Markese , research director of the American Association of Individual Investors , a Chicago-based educational group . 
`` The biggest problem we have is that investors realize , after the fact , that they did n't understand what they were investing in . '' 
Dr. Blumenfeld concedes he did n't fully understand what he was buying . 
He says that he knew he was getting a zero-coupon CD and that he had previously invested in TIGRs ( Treasury Income Growth Receipts ) , a type of zero-coupon Treasury security sold by Merrill Lynch . 
But he says he did n't understand he was buying the CD on the secondary market , and he contends his broker never fully explained the risks . 
The broker , Thomas Beairsto of Merrill Lynch 's Morristown , N.J. , office , refuses to discuss the matter with a reporter , referring inquiries to Merrill Lynch officials in New York . 
Those officials say there was full disclosure of the risks in a `` fact sheet '' sent to all CD investors with their confirmation of sale . 
The fact sheet , dated April 1986 , says on page three : `` If the price paid for a CD purchased in the secondary market ... is higher than the accreted value in the case of zero-coupon CDs , the difference ... is not insured ... . 
Computations involving zero-coupon CDs are more complicated and you should discuss any questions you may have with your financial consultant . '' 
Dr. Blumenfeld says he does n't remember the paragraph about premiums in the fact sheet he received and did n't realize part of what he paid was a premium . 
`` I assumed I was buying a CD as a CD , '' he says . 
Nevertheless , Merrill Lynch has agreed that if the thrift that issued Dr. Blumenfeld 's CD , Peoples Heritage Federal Savings & Loan Association in Salina , Kan. , is liquidated and the CD terminated , the brokerage firm would cover the premium Dr. Blumenfeld paid . 
( Federal deposit insurance would pay principal and interest accrued to the date of liquidation , to a maximum of $ 100,000 . ) 
`` It 's not a blanket commitment , it 's a case-by-case situation , '' says Albert Disposti , a managing director of Merrill Lynch Money Markets Inc . 
`` There 's a question whether brokers at the time were fully aware '' of the risks . 
`` We were n't sure that full disclosure , as we wanted it , was being made . '' 
Merrill Lynch says it 's impossible to estimate how many investors are in Dr. Blumenfeld 's situation , although it says the firm has received only one other complaint about premiums on the secondary market in three years . 
Merrill Lynch now provides credit rating information about the institutions whose CDs it sells , which it did n't provide in 1986 . 
Zero-coupon CDs are only a small portion of the $ 1 trillion-plus in CDs outstanding , and those purchased on the secondary market are an even smaller part of the total . 
Merrill Lynch estimates that fewer than 10 financial institutions currently issue zero-coupon CDs . 
Still , there are several billion dollars of zero-coupon CDs with various maturities outstanding . 
Because of the tax consequences of zero-coupon investments -- income tax is payable in the year interest is accrued , although interest is n't actually paid until maturity -- zero-coupon CDs are usually sold for tax-advantaged accounts to finance things like retirement and children 's education . 
Most zero-coupon CDs are in maturities of six to nine years , and they usually double in value by maturity . 
But investors who bought zero-coupon CDs in the secondary market are n't the only ones who may be surprised to learn the full amount of their investments is n't insured . 
People who paid a premium for standard CDs purchased on the secondary market could also find that those premiums are n't insured if the institutions that issued the CDs failed . 
However , those premiums are usually far smaller than on zero-coupon CDs , and the simpler pricing structure of a standard CD makes it more apparent when a premium is paid . 
Whatever the case , a Merrill Lynch spokesman emphasizes , investors should n't have to worry about the uninsured premium issue , unless the bank or thrift that issued the CD is closed and its deposits paid off before maturity or transferred to another institution at a lower rate . 
Dr. Blumenfeld says he 's satisfied that his problem has been resolved . 
And he says he 's learned a lesson : `` You always have to watch out for yourself . 
No one else will watch out for you . 
Americans are drinking less , but young professionals from Australia to West Germany are rushing to buy premium-brand American vodka , brandy and other spirits . 
In particular , many are snubbing the scotch preferred by their parents and opting for bourbon , the sweet firewater from the Kentucky countryside . 
With U.S. liquor consumption declining steadily , many American producers are stepping up their marketing efforts abroad . 
And those efforts are paying off : Spirits exports jumped more than 2 1\/2 times to $ 157.2 million in 1988 from $ 59.8 million in 1983 , according to the Distilled Spirits Council of the U.S. , a trade group . 
`` Spirits companies now view themselves as global marketers , '' says Michael Bellas , president of Beverage Marketing Corp. , a research and consulting firm . 
`` If you want to be a player , you have to be in America , Europe and the Far East . 
You must have world-class brands , a long-term perspective and deep pockets . '' 
The internationalization of the industry has been hastened by foreign companies ' acquisitions of many U.S. producers . 
In recent years , for example , Grand Metropolitan PLC of Britain acquired Heublein Inc. , while another British company , Guinness PLC , took over United Distillers Group and Schenley Industries Inc . 
But the shift has also been fueled by necessity . 
While premium-brand spirits like Smirnoff vodka and Jack Daniel 's whiskey are riding high in the U.S. , domestic spirits consumption fell 15 % to 141.1 million cases in 1988 from 166 million cases in 1979 . 
In recent years , growth has come in the foreign markets . 
U.S. brandy exports more than doubled last year to 360,000 proof gallons , a standard industry measure , according to Jobson Beverage Alcohol Group , an industry association . 
Exports of rum surged 54 % to 814,000 proof gallons . 
Mexico is the biggest importer of both rum and brandy from the U.S. . 
Japan , the world 's third-largest liquor market after the U.S. and Britain , helped American companies in April when it lowered its tax on imported spirits and levied a tax on many domestic products . 
California wineries , benefiting from lowered trade barriers and federal marketing subsidies , are expanding aggressively into Japan , as well as Canada and Great Britain . 
In Japan , the wineries are promoting their products ' Pacific roots and courting restaurant and hotel chefs , whose recommendations carry weight . 
In Australia , Britain , Canada and Greece , Brown-Forman Corp. has increased its marketing of Southern Comfort Liqueur . 
Using cinema , television and print ads , the company pitches Southern Comfort as a grand old drink of the antebellum American South . 
The biggest foreign inroads , though , have been made by bourbon . 
While U.S. makers of vodka , rum and other spirits compete against powerhouses abroad , trade agreements prohibit any other country from making bourbon . 
( All bourbon comes from Kentucky , though Jack Daniel 's Tennessee whiskey often is counted as bourbon because of similarity of taste . ) 
Moreover , just as vodka has acquired an upscale image in the U.S. , bourbon has become fashionable in many foreign countries , a uniquely American product tied to frontier folklore . 
How was the West won ? 
With a six-shooter in one hand and bourbon in the other . 
`` We imagine with bourbon the Wild West , Western motion pictures and gunmen appearing , '' says Kenji Kishimoto , vice president of Suntory International Corp. , a division of Suntory Ltd. , Japan 's largest liquor company . 
Suntory distributes Brown-Forman bourbons in Japan . 
Bourbon makes up just 1 % of world-wide spirits consumption , but it represented 57 % of U.S. liquor exports last year , according to Jobson ; no other category had more than 19 % . 
Big U.S. distillers are fiercely vying for this market , which grew to $ 77 million last year from $ 33 million in 1987 , according to government figures . 
Jim Beam Brands Co. , a division of American Brands Inc. , is the leading exporter of bourbon and produces 10 other types of liquor . 
The company says it will increase its international advertising 35 % in 1990 , with bourbon representing most of that amount . 
Guinness 's Schenley Industries unit has increased its TV advertising in Japan and has built partnerships with duty-free shops throughout Asia , enabling it to install prominent counter displays . 
The company 's I.W. Harper brand is the leading bourbon in Japan , with 40 % of the market . 
Bourbon exporters have succeeded in Japan where other industries have failed , avoiding cultural hitches in marketing and distribution by allying themselves with local agents . 
Jim Beam Brands has a distribution partnership with Nikka Whiskey Co. , a distiller . 
Seagram Co. , which exports Four Roses bourbon , has such a link with Kirin Brewery Co . 
Some bourbon makers advertise abroad as they do at home . 
To promote Jack Daniel 's overseas , Brown-Forman uses the same photos of front porches from Lynchburg , Va. , and avuncular old men in overalls and hightops . 
Jim Beam print ads , however , strike different chords in different countries . 
In Australia , land of the outback , a snapshot of Jim Beam lies on a strip of hand-tooled leather . 
West Germans get glitz , with bourbon in the foreground and a posh Beverly Hills hotel in the background . 
Ads for England are artsy and irreverent . 
One ad features a huge robot carrying a voluptuous woman in a faint . 
The tagline : `` I only asked if she wanted a Jim Beam . 
Capital Cities / ABC Inc. 's net income rose 29 % on a modest 9 % increase in revenue in the third quarter , mainly on strong advertising demand at its ABC television network operation . 
Demand for ads also rose at the eight TV stations Capital Cities owns and at its 80%-owned ESPN sports cable channel . 
The broadcast and publishing company reported net climbed to $ 80.8 million , or $ 4.56 a share , from $ 62.6 million , or $ 3.55 a share , in the year-earlier period . 
Revenue reached $ 1.1 billion from $ 1.01 billion . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Capital Cities closed at $ 558.50 , down $ 5 . 
The broadcasting unit reported operating profit of $ 134.9 million , up 18 % from the year-earlier $ 114.3 million . 
Publishing reported operating profit was $ 33.3 million , nearly flat with the year-before $ 33 million . 
Revenue at the broadcasting unit , consisting of the network and stations , advanced 11 % , to $ 838 million from $ 752.9 million . 
The publishing unit reported revenue edged up 2.6 % to $ 263.2 million from $ 256.6 million . 
Chairman Thomas S. Murphy cited Capital Cities ' nine daily newspapers in explaining most of the gain . 
The parent also publishes weeklies , shopping guides and specialty magazines . 
For 1989 's first nine months , Capital Cities net income grew 23 % to $ 303.7 million , or $ 16.97 a share , from $ 246.9 million , or $ 14.43 a share . 
Revenue eased 0.3 % to $ 3.45 billion from $ 3.46 billion . 
Last week , ABC unseated General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co. unit as the No. 1 network , as rated by A.C. Nielsen Co . 
ABC has four shows in the top 10 , including the top show , `` Roseanne . 
As part of a previously announced transaction , Federal Mogul Corp. has bought approximately 565,000 shares of its common stock from Nortek Inc. at $ 23.50 a share . 
Nortek has agreed not to acquire any securities of Federal-Mogul for 10 years and not to influence company affairs during that period . 
Weyerhaeuser Co. said it sold its wall-paneling business to an affiliate of one of Indonesia 's largest wood-products firms . 
Terms of the transaction were n't disclosed . 
Weyerhaeuser said its paneling business employs about 300 workers at two facilities in Chesapeake , Va. , and Hancock , Vt . 
Manville Corp. said it will build a $ 24 million power plant to provide electricity to its Igaras pulp and paper mill in Brazil . 
The company said the plant will ensure that it has adequate energy for the mill and will reduce the mill 's energy costs . 
Manville said it expects the plant to begin operating at the end of 1991 . 
Housing and Urban Development Secretary Jack Kemp called on the Federal Reserve System to lower interest rates . 
In a speech to the Mortgage Bankers Association , Mr. Kemp broke the administration 's public silence on the Fed and complained that `` interest rates are too high . '' 
`` I am convinced that a monetary policy for this country that would return interest rates to the historical level of 4 % or 5 % would have not only an immediate impact on housing starts , the housing stock , our industry in America , the refurbishing of our industrial system , it would help the Third World economies considerably and it would particularly have a favorable impact upon our budget deficit , '' Mr. Kemp said . 
The Fed recently eased credit by lowering the bellwether federal funds interest rate to 8 3\/4 % from about 9 % . 
Bush administration officials say inflation is under control . 
With economic growth slowing , they say they believe the Fed should ease credit even further . 
But for the most part , officials have avoided expressing those views in public , fearing they would unnecessarily antagonize the Fed . 
McDonald 's Corp. said third-quarter earnings rose 14 % on a hefty sales gain , but domestic franchisees apparently did n't partake of the improvement . 
The world 's largest fast-food chain said net income rose to $ 217.9 million , or 59 cents a share , from $ 191.3 million , or 51 cents a share , a year ago . 
In the latest period , the company had an average of 370.8 million shares , 5.6 million shares below last year 's level . 
Revenue rose 12 % to $ 1.63 billion from $ 1.46 billion . 
Systemwide sales , which include sales at franchisee as well as company-owned stores , totaled $ 4.59 billion compared with $ 4.2 billion . 
But sales for U.S. franchisees were flat at best on a per-store basis despite weak 1988 figures . 
Compared with the first nine months of last year , average franchisee store sales this year were down nearly $ 3,200 , reflecting a fierce discounting war among fast-food chains . 
Since McDonald 's menu prices rose this year , the actual decline may have been more . 
McDonald 's closed at $ 31.375 , up $ 1 , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday . 
While franchisees were having a tough time holding sales , McDonald 's company-operated stores posted hefty gains for the nine months , with sales per company-operated unit rising $ 20,000 . 
One analyst noted that the company often has better store locations than do its franchisees , thus aiding promotional efforts . 
On average in the latest nine months , company-operated units in the U.S. had $ 90,552 more in sales than did franchised outlets . 
There are more than three times as many franchised domestic outlets as there are company stores . 
Profit margins at U.S. company-owned stores in the quarter were up nearly 1 % , which the company attributed in part to lower food costs . 
Prudential-Bache Securities analyst Leslie Steppel said reduced labor costs helped boost margins , although she doubted `` that kind of performance is sustainable . '' 
Calling sales `` still relatively soft , '' Ms. Steppel believes that in real terms , U.S. sales slipped 3 1\/2 % to 4 % at company-operated stores in the quarter . 
Apparently acknowledging weaker U.S. sales systemwide , McDonald 's vowed `` to use our size and muscle to do all that is necessary to build the brand . '' 
Overseas , both franchisees and the company performed substantially better than a year ago . 
Third-quarter sales in Europe were exceptionally strong , boosted by promotional programs and new products -- although weaker foreign currencies reduced the company 's earnings . 
McDonald 's said that systemwide sales would have been $ 115 million greater had 1988 exchange rates remained in effect . 
`` Going into the fourth quarter the sales comparison will be more difficult , '' predicted restaurant analyst Howard Hansen of Kidder , Peabody & Co . 
Reflecting better growth prospects abroad , McDonald 's noted that as of Sept. 30 more stores were under construction overseas than a year ago , while the opposite was true for domestic expansion . 
At the end of the third quarter McDonald 's had 10,873 units operating world-wide . 
In the nine months , earnings rose 12 % to $ 555.6 million , or $ 1.49 a share , from $ 494.4 million , or $ 1.31 a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue rose 11 % to $ 4.56 billion from $ 4.12 billion . 
Carnival Cruise Lines Inc. 's common stock was dragged down yesterday amid concerns that a bankruptcy filing by a Finnish shipbuilder would delay delivery of three big cruise ships . 
The Miami-based company 's stock fell $ 1.75 yesterday to $ 20.75 a share in heavy American Stock Exchange composite trading . 
Early yesterday , Carnival said in a company statement that it had been `` notified unofficially '' that Waertsilae Marine Industries , the Finnish shipyard that is building its three new cruise ships , planned to file for bankruptcy . 
Officials at Carnival declined to comment . 
`` There is just a tremendous amount of uncertainty about what the effect , if any , of all this is , '' said John P. Uphoff , an analyst at Raymond James Associates Inc . 
`` I did n't even know that a company in a socialistic country could file for bankruptcy . '' 
Carnival said the `` Fantasy , '' the first of the three $ 200 million ships that Carnival has on order , is scheduled to be delivered next month , just in time for the winter tourist season in the Caribbean . 
That ship , which would carry about 2,050 passengers , would expand the capacity of Carnival 's existing 14-ship fleet by 24 % . 
The second ship , which is half-completed , is scheduled to be delivered in fall 1990 , and the third in fall 1991 . 
`` There 's a 99 % chance that the Fantasy will be delivered close to schedule , '' said Caroline Levy , an analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc . 
`` The others will probably be delivered as well , but Carnival will likely have to pay a higher price for them . '' 
She said the company could pay as much as 25 % more for the ships . 
If the ships are n't delivered , however , it will likely have an effect on the company 's earnings as soon as the 1990 fiscal year , which begins Dec. 1 . 
Analysts said those estimates -- which range from about $ 1.80 a share to $ 1.95 a share -- are based on Fantasy being in operation in 1990 . 
If the ship fails to arrive , those per-share earnings estimates could be trimmed 15 cents or more . 
Analysts were n't willing to speculate on how much money Carnival might lose through deposits . 
Normally , a company pays a portion of the total cost of a ship as it reaches various stages of construction . 
Carnival , for example , has already paid about $ 160 million of the total cost for Fantasy . 
Some analysts say this may give it the right to seize the ship if the situation warrants it . 
According to reports from Finland , Waertsilae Marine , 19%-owned by conglomerate Oy Waertsilae , filed for bankruptcy yesterday after the shipyard 's contractors had started to demand bank guarantees . 
The shipyard disclosed in mid-August that it expected losses stemming from a series of unprofitable orders . 
Designer Sandra Garratt filed for Chapter 7 Bankruptcy Code protection , saying that her cash flow had been cut off . 
The designer , whose line of modular , one-size-fits-all clothing has spawned a host of clones , has been in a dispute with her latest licensee , Jerell Inc. for several months . 
Ms. Garratt was the subject of a Wall Street Journal article in March . 
The designer 's attorney , Molly Bartholow , said that Ms. Garratt was forced to start bankruptcy-law proceedings because Jerell began withholding her royalty payments last month . 
Jerell paid Ms. Garratt royalties for the line known as Multiples by Sandra Garratt , which are sold primarily through department stores . 
Ms. Garratt sued the Dallas apparel maker earlier this year , charging that Jerell developed and marketed clothing lines fashioned after her designs , in violation of their contract . 
That lawsuit is still pending . 
Jerell could n't immediately be reached for comment . 
Ms. Garratt 's assets and liabilities were n't disclosed . 
Eaton Corp. had a 26 % drop in third-quarter profit mainly because of lower sales of truck parts , its largest and most profitable single business . 
Sales of medium and heavy-duty trucks continue to lag previous-year rates , leading Eaton to expect fourth-quarter net income to fall below year-earlier levels , said Stephen R. Hardis , vice chairman and chief financial and administrative officer . 
He declined to make a specific earnings estimate . 
Third-quarter net was $ 40 million , or $ 1.04 a share , from $ 54.4 million , or $ 1.47 a share , a year ago . 
Sales rose 2.8 % to $ 864.1 million , from $ 840.4 million . 
The quarter net was below analyst expectations mainly because truck-parts sales did n't rebound in September from the summer doldrums as they usually do , said Patrick E. Sheridan , analyst with McDonald & Co . 
Mr. Sheridan , who had been expecting quarter profit of about $ 1.25 a share , says he is reducing his estimate for the year to the area of $ 5.70 a share , from his previous estimate of $ 6.10 . 
Eli Lustgarten of PaineWebber Inc. , who a couple of weeks ago reduced his 1989 estimate to $ 5.70 a share because of the weakening truck market , says he will make another cut to about $ 5.50 a share in light of the third-quarter report . 
He said Eaton 's quarter profit margin on controls was lower than he anticipated . 
Eaton said sales of truck axles , transmissions and other parts fell 7.2 % to $ 295 million . 
Sales of parts for cars and construction vehicles rose . 
Eaton does n't provide profit figures separately for each category , but operating profit for vehicle parts as a group fell 26 % to $ 51 million on an about 1 % drop in sales to $ 488 million . 
Mr. Hardis said truck-fleet operators appear to be cautious about buying new trucks until they see how the economy behaves . 
The truck sales slowdown reflects the general slowing in sales of consumer goods , he said , and the latest reports show a slight improvement rather than any indication of a downward spiral . 
Operating profit from electrical and electronics controls , Eaton 's other major business group , fell 11 % to $ 32 million , despite a 7.7 % increase in sales to $ 376 million . 
The company attributed the decline to weakness in the commercial-switch market in North America and in the European appliance-controls market . 
For the nine months , net -- including profit from discontinued operations both years and in 1988 an extraordinary charge of $ 17.7 million related to settlement of a lawsuit -- was $ 170.6 million , or $ 4.54 a share , up 5.8 % from $ 161.3 million , or $ 4.32 a share , a year ago . 
Eaton earned from continuing operations $ 165.1 million , or $ 4.40 a share , down 7 % from $ 177.5 million , or $ 4.76 a share , a year earlier . 
Nine-month sales were $ 2.79 billion , up 8.2 % from $ 2.58 billion a year earlier . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Eaton closed at $ 57.50 a share , down $ 2.50 . 
In Poland 's rapid shift from socialism to an undefined alternative , environmental issues have become a cutting edge of broader movements to restructure the economy , cut cumbersome bureaucracies , and democratize local politics . 
Initial steps were taken at Poland 's first international environmental conference , which I attended last month . 
The conference , held in Lower Silesia , was co-sponsored by the Environment Ministry , the Rockefeller Brothers Fund , and the Polish Ecological Club , and was attended by 50 Poles from government and industry , as well as Hungarians , Czechs , Russians , Japanese and Americans . 
The conference was entitled `` Economic Mechanisms for Environmental Protection , '' a significant departure from East Bloc usage , which recognizes only one economic mechanism -- central planning -- to direct industrial behavior . 
Even more remarkably , it focused on emissions trading and similar market approaches to address pollution , notwithstanding Poland 's lack of functioning markets . 
Why did East Bloc participants unanimously endorse market-based pollution approaches ? 
The answer lies both in the degraded environment of these countries and the perceived causes of that degradation . 
Like other East Bloc countries , Poland possesses environmental laws more honored in their breach than in their observance . 
According to a detailed report by Zbigniew Bochniarz of the University of Minnesota 's Hubert Humphrey Institute , 27 areas containing a third of Poland 's population are regarded as `` ecological hazards '' due to multiple violations of standards . 
Norms are consistently exceeded at 60 % of nitrogen oxide monitoring sites and 80 % of those for dust and soot emissions . 
Four-fifths of Poland 's soils have become highly acidified ; 70 % of its southern forests are projected to die by century 's end . 
Between 1965 and 1985 , Polish waters fit for human consumption dropped from 33 % to 6 % of all surface waters , while those unfit even for industry use nearly doubled . 
Poland produces about 20 times more soot and five times more sulfur dioxide and solid waste per unit of gross national product than does Western Europe . 
Its mortality rate for males over 35 is about 50 % higher than West Germany 's , and 50 % higher in hazard areas than the national average . 
Since 1978 , average annual growth rates for most pollutants have outstripped the growth of GNP . 
Conference participants saw these effects as flowing directly from ( a ) Marxist devaluation of environmental resources , which are not produced by labor ; ( b ) planned economies ' inability to control pollution where enterprises are state-owned and penalties are paid by the government ; and ( c ) the continuing Stalinist emphasis on heavy industry for economic development , producing a far heavier and more wasteful use of energy and natural resources than in the West . 
They repeatedly noted that environmental progress could not be secured without true ownership , genuine competition based on market factors , and the risk of bankruptcy if a business makes the wrong decisions . 
The solutions they formally proposed included lead / sulfur taxes , conservation and recycling incentives , reforestation offsets , transferable pollution permits , an ecological bank to finance pollution-reduction credits , and debt-for-environment swaps . 
But their most fundamental recommendation was to separate industry from the state , making it fully accountable for pollution control . 
A revolution takes more than conference manifestos . 
Indeed , skepticism was amply captured by a joke told by Poles at the conference : `` The world must be coming to an end . 
The Russians are talking peace . 
The Palestinians are talking elections . 
And the Poles are engaged in commerce . '' 
But the implications of such a shift to market approaches go well beyond the fact that Poland is already working on nationwide emissions trades to reduce smelter pollution , or that the Soviets plan to introduce marketable pollution permits in some republics next year . 
Those implications include : -- Privatization . 
Faced with a $ 40 billion foreign debt and skyrocketing inflation , Poland must privatize industry and eliminate subsidies to stabilize its currency and qualify for international assistance . 
Market-based pollution control may consume some capital that would otherwise purchase state industries . 
But it could also accelerate `` marketization '' by reinforcing industrial accountability , breaking up state monopolies , giving managers a stake in solutions , and ensuring that modernization is not reversible for failure to address environmental effects . 
-- Least-cost solutions . 
As conferees noted , scarce capital means the costs of control must be minimized through a broad menu of compliance choices for individual firms . 
That means simple , clear rules that secure the first large blocks of reduction , deferring more complex issues such as risk . 
It also means use of quantity-based pollution limits such as transferable permits , rather than price-based limits such as effluent fees . 
That 's because quota-trained managers will likely respond better to quantity than to price signals . 
-- Creative financing . 
Even least-cost environmental solutions will require billions of dollars . 
New types of financing must make funds available without draining Poland 's hard-currency reserves . 
-- Democratization . 
East Bloc pollution data typically have been state secrets . 
While Polish data have been freely available since 1980 , it was no accident that participants urged the free flow of information . 
For once information flows , public participation follows and repression becomes difficult to reimpose . 
-- Global reciprocity . 
One participant prematurely declared that America has had a free market in goods but a planned economy for environmental protection , while Poland represents the opposite . 
His point : It will be increasingly difficult for the U.S. to cling to command-and-control measures if even the East Bloc steps to a different drummer . 
At the moment , Poland resembles 19th-century Pittsburgh more than a modern industrial society -- with antiquated production , inadequate environmental management , and little ecological awareness . 
But the continuing pressures for free-market economics suggest the conference 's vision was not all fantasy . 
Mr. Levin , former head of EPA 's regulatory reform staff , adapted this from his November column for the Journal of the Air and Waste Management Association . 
Disappointing earnings news from some technology companies unnerved investors in the over-the-counter market , who sold shares of Apple Computer , Intel and many other computer-related concerns . 
The drop in those and other technology stocks contributed to an 0.7 % slide by the Nasdaq composite index . 
It finished at 467.22 , down 3.45 . 
The nervousness about the technology stock outlook also hurt the Dow Jones Industrial Average , which slipped about 1 % . 
Mostly because of the sell-off in technology stocks , the Nasdaq 100 Index of the OTC 's largest non-financial issues dropped 4.58 to 457.52 . 
The Nasdaq Financial Index of giant insurance and banking issues lost 2.38 to 458.32 . 
Some traders said the sell-off of technology stocks on low volume reflected a lack of conviction by investors . 
But Charlie Howley , vice president in charge of OTC trading at SoundView Financial in Stamford , Conn. , said the selling was orderly . 
`` It 's a quiet retreat , '' said Mr. Howley . 
`` It 's nothing dramatic , just a routine sell-off . '' 
Some of it was due to lower-than-expected earnings from leading companies , he said . 
But some of it also represented profit-taking by investors who have made big gains in some issues . 
Yesterday 's volume of 117.2 million shares was far below last week 's sizzling average of nearly 177 million . 
For October so far , daily volume is averaging 150.3 million , putting it on track to be the year 's busiest month . 
Apple Computer , which reported lackluster earnings Friday , lost 1 1\/4 to 46 3\/4 on 1.1 million shares . 
Stratus Computer , which reported earnings late Friday that were in line with a disappointing forecast , eased 3\/4 to 24 on 816,000 shares . 
Investors apparently did n't like the news from Rainbow Technologies either . 
It said net income was 17 cents a share in the third quarter , compared with 16 cents a share a year earlier . 
Rainbow 's stock dropped 2 to 14 1\/4 . 
Other technology stocks that were weaker included Intel , which fell 1 1\/4 to 33 1\/2 on 1.9 million shares , Mentor Graphics , down 3\/4 to 16 1\/4 on 1.6 million shares , Sun Microsystems , which slipped 3\/8 to 18 1\/4 , and MCI Communications , down 1 to 42 3\/4 . 
Microsoft , which last week rose to a record , fell victim to profit-taking , traders said , as it declined 2 1\/8 to 83 1\/8 . 
Conner Peripherals was unchanged at 15 . 
Among takeover stocks , Jefferson Smurfit jumped 1 1\/4 to 42 1\/2 after SIBV-MS Holdings said the price to be paid to Jefferson Smurfit 's minority holders has been raised to $ 43 a share . 
The increase of $ 1.25 a share is being made to settle shareholder litigation relating to SIBV-MS 's tender offer . 
SIBV-MS Holdings is a new company jointly owned by an affiliate of Jefferson Smurfit and a Morgan Stanley limited partnership . 
The Jefferson Smurfit affiliate , Smurfit International B.V. , holds about 78 % of the shares outstanding . 
These shares will be bought by SIBV-MS Holdings at $ 41.75 each after the acquisition of the minority shares . 
Another takeover target , LIN Broadcasting , eased 1\/2 to 110 1\/8 on 313,800 shares . 
LIN 's suitor , McCaw Cellular Communications , dropped 1 to 40 on almost 350,000 shares . 
Some analysts say investors will begin paying more attention to earnings , partly in response to the latest round of disappointments . 
They say investors will favor companies that historically have posted annual earnings growth of 15 % to 20 % . 
That would be good news for the OTC market , some analysts say , because many small growth stocks are traded there . 
Michael R. Weisberg , partner in charge of research at Robertson Stephens & Co. in San Francisco , said some investors have already made the switch . 
The Robertson Stephens Index of 340 emerging growth stocks is up 23.1 % for the year through Friday . 
The rise matches that of the Dow Jones industrials this year . 
`` It 's been a spectacular year for the emerging growth stock investor , '' Mr. Weisberg said . 
He predicted that the most popular growth companies will be those with `` some kind of unique product or franchise '' that makes them appear able to sustain their momentum . 
He puts the OTC market 's Nellcor , Office Club and BizMart on the list . 
Nellcor , a maker of electronic patient monitoring systems , was up 3\/4 to 16 7\/8 on 258,000 shares yesterday , while retailing issue Office Club was unchanged at 10 3\/4 on 65,200 shares . 
BizMart , another retailing stock , was off 3\/8 to 8 1\/4 on nearly 80,000 shares . 
Other favorites of growth-stock analysts and money managers also had a mixed session . 
Payco American , a credit collection concern , jumped 1 3\/8 to 20 5\/8 on volume of 93,000 , and Mail Boxes Etc. , a private postal services company , advanced 1\/2 to 23 1\/2 on volume of 64,000 . 
But Legent , a systems software stock , was down 1\/2 to 29 3\/4 on 39,300 shares . 
Novell , a computer networking concern , fell 1 1\/2 to 30 on 152,000 shares . 
Elsewhere , Valley National continued its slide , dropping 2 1\/8 to 15 on 1.7 million shares . 
The Arizona banking concern is facing difficulties related to weakness in the real estate market in the state . 
Higher earnings helped some issues . 
Amgen rose 2 1\/4 to 54 3\/4 on almost 800,000 shares , and CVB Financial jumped 4 to 41 on only 1,000 shares . 
Why ca n't we teach our children to read , write and reckon ? 
It 's not that we do n't know how to , because we do . 
It 's that we do n't want to . 
And the reason we do n't want to is that effective education would require us to relinquish some cherished metaphysical beliefs about human nature in general and the human nature of young people in particular , as well as to violate some cherished vested interests . 
These beliefs so dominate our educational establishment , our media , our politicians , and even our parents that it seems almost blasphemous to challenge them . 
Here is an example . 
If I were to ask a sample of American parents , `` Do you wish the elementary schools to encourage creativity in your children ? '' the near-unanimous answer would be , `` Yes , of course . '' 
But what do we mean , specifically , by `` creativity '' ? 
No one can say . 
In practice , it ends up being equated with a `` self-expression '' that encourages the youngsters ' `` self-esteem . '' 
The result is a generation of young people whose ignorance and intellectual incompetence is matched only by their good opinion of themselves . 
The whole notion of `` creativity '' in education was ( and is ) part and parcel of a romantic rebellion against disciplined instruction , which was ( and is ) regarded as `` authoritarian , '' a repression and frustration of the latent talents and the wonderful , if as yet undefined , potentialities inherent in the souls of all our children . 
It is not surprising that parents find this romantic extravagance so attractive . 
Fortunately , these same parents do want their children to get a decent education as traditionally understood , and they have enough common sense to know what that demands . 
Their commitment to `` creativity '' can not survive adolescent illiteracy . 
American education 's future will be determined by the degree to which we -- all of us -- allow this common sense to prevail over the illusions that we also share . 
The education establishment will fight against common sense every inch of the way . 
The reasons are complex , but one simple reason ought not to be underestimated . 
`` Progressive education '' ( as it was once called ) is far more interesting and agreeable to teachers than is disciplined instruction . 
It is nice for teachers to think they are engaged in `` personality development '' and even nicer to minimize those irksome tests with often disappointing results . 
It also provides teachers with a superior self-definition as a `` profession , '' since they will have passed courses in educational psychology and educational philosophy . 
I myself took such courses in college , thinking I might end up a schoolteacher . 
They could all fairly be described as `` pap '' courses . 
But it is unfair to dump on teachers , as distinct from the educational establishment . 
I know many schoolteachers and , on the whole , they are seriously committed to conscientious teaching . 
They may not be among the `` best and brightest '' of their generation -- there are very few such people , by definition . 
But they need not be to do their jobs well . 
Yes , we all can remember one or two truly inspiring teachers from our school days . 
But our education proceeded at the hands of those others , who were merely competent and conscientious . 
In this sense , a teacher can be compared to one 's family doctor . 
If he were brilliant , he probably would not be a family doctor in the first place . 
If he is competent and conscientious , he serves us well . 
Our teachers are not an important factor in our educational crisis . 
Whether they are or are not underpaid is a problem of equity ; it is not an educational problem . 
It is silly libel on our teachers to think they would educate our children better if only they got a few thousand dollars a year more . 
It is the kind of libel the teachers ' unions do n't mind spreading , for their own narrow purposes . 
It is also the kind of libel politicians find useful , since it helps them strike a friendly posture on behalf of an important constituency . 
But there is not one shred of evidence that , other things being equal , salary differentials result in educational differentials . 
If there were such evidence , you can be sure you would have heard of it . 
If we wish to be serious about American education , we know exactly what to do -- and , just as important , what not to do . 
There are many successful schools scattered throughout this nation , some of them in the poorest of ghettos , and they are all sending us the same message . 
Conversely , there are the majority of unsuccessful schools , and we know which efforts at educational reform are doomed beforehand . 
We really do know all we need to know , if only we could assimilate this knowledge into our thinking . 
In this respect , it would be helpful if our political leaders were mute , rather than eloquently `` concerned . '' 
They are inevitably inclined to echo the conventional pap , since this is the least controversial option that is open to them . 
Thus at the recent governors ' conference on education , Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas announced that `` this country needs a comprehensive child-development policy for children under five . '' 
A comprehensive development policy for governors over 30 would seem to be a more pressing need . 
What Gov. Clinton is advocating , in effect , is extending the educational system down to the pre-kindergarten years . 
Whether desirable or not , this is a child-care program , not an educational program . 
We know that very early exposure to schooling improves performance in the first grade , but afterward the difference is quickly washed away . 
Let us sum up what we do know about education and about those education reforms that do work and do n't work : -- `` Parental involvement '' is a bad idea . 
Parents are too likely to blame schools for the educational limitations of their children . 
Parents should be involved with their children 's education at home , not in school . 
They should see to it that their kids do n't play truant ; they should make certain that the children spend enough time doing homework ; they should scrutinize the report card . 
If parents are dissatisfied with a school , they should have the option of switching to another . 
-- `` Community involvement '' is an even worse idea . 
Here , the experience of New York City is decisive . 
Locally elected school boards , especially in our larger cities , become the prey of ambitious , generally corrupt , and invariably demagogic local politicians or would-be politicians . 
New York is in the process of trying to disengage itself from a 20-year-old commitment to this system of school governance , even as Chicago and other cities are moving to institute it . 
-- In most states , increasing expenditures on education , in our current circumstances , will probably make things worse , not better . 
The reason is simple : Education takes place in the classroom , where the influence of money is minimal . 
Decades of educational research tell us unequivocally that even smaller classes have zero effect on the academic performance of the pupils -- though they may sometimes be desirable for other reasons . 
The new money flows into the already top-heavy administrative structure , which busies itself piling more and more paper work on the teachers . 
There is neither mystery nor paradox in the fact that as educational expenditures ( in real terms ) have increased sharply in the past quarter-of-a-century -- we now spend more per pupil than any other country in the world -- educational performance has declined . 
That is the way the system works . 
-- Students should move up the educational ladder as their academic potential allows . 
No student should be permitted to be graduated from elementary school without having mastered the 3 R 's at the level that prevailed 20 years ago . 
This means `` tracking , '' whose main purpose is less to permit the gifted youngsters to flourish ( though that is clearly desirable ) than to ensure that the less gifted get the necessary grounding for further study or for entering the modern world of work . 
The notion that tracking is somehow `` undemocratic '' is absurd . 
The purpose of education is to encourage young men and women to realize their full academic potential . 
No one in his right mind actually believes that we all have an equal academic potential . 
-- It is generally desirable to use older textbooks -- many of them , alas , out of print -- rather than newer ones . 
The latter are modish , trendy , often downright silly , and at best insubstantial . 
They are based on dubious psychological and sociological theories rather than on educational experience . 
One of the reasons American students do so poorly in math tests , as compared with British , French , German or Japanese students , is the influence of the `` New Math '' on American textbooks and teaching methods . 
Anyone who wants to appreciate just how bizarre this situation is -- with students who ca n't add or subtract `` learning '' the conceptual basis of mathematical theory -- should read the article by Caleb Nelson ( himself a recent math major at Harvard ) in the November American Spectator . 
-- Most important of all , schools should have principals with a large measure of authority over the faculty , the curriculum , and all matters of student discipline . 
Study after study -- the most recent from the Brookings Institution -- tells us that the best schools are those that are free of outside interference and are governed by a powerful head . 
With that authority , of course , goes an unambiguous accountability . 
Schools that are structured in this way produce students with higher morale and superior academic performance . 
This is a fact -- though , in view of all the feathers that are ruffled by this fact , it is not surprising that one hears so little about it . 
Mr. Kristol , an American Enterprise Institute fellow , co-edits The Public Interest and publishes The National Interest . 
International Business Machines Corp. unveiled a broad strategy to tackle the biggest problem that manufacturers face when computerizing their operations : Most machines ca n't talk to each other . 
The company unveiled more than 50 products , mostly software , that are designed to integrate the three areas of a manufacturing operation -- the plant floor , design operations and production planning . 
The aim , ultimately , is to increase the flow of information into a manufacturer 's main computer network for use in business planning , marketing and other operations . 
Manufacturers have already spent so heavily on automation that they are one of the computer industry 's leading revenue sources . 
But many manufacturers find that communication between different computers has been rendered nearly impossible by the babel of computer languages used by different machines , including robots and machine tools . 
IBM 's announcement , which was expected and will formally be made to customers today , also marks an attempt to gain credibility on the plant floor , where Digital Equipment Corp. has long dominated and where Hewlett-Packard Co. has recently gained market share . 
Consultants have said that it will take a while for all the pieces of the IBM strategy to fall into place , even though the specific products IBM unveiled will generally be available by the end of the first quarter . 
Sam Albert , a consultant in Scarsdale , N.Y. , said that in the past IBM has developed broad software strategies only for problems that crossed industry lines . 
He said he believes IBM 's decision to invest this sort of effort into a single industry showed that it was getting serious about understanding customers ' problems and was n't just selling technology . 
He said he expects IBM to unveil similar strategies for other industries in coming months . 
IBM 's push is also unusual in its approach to marketing . 
Rather than just send out marketing people to knock on customers ' doors , IBM is making several hundred of its own manufacturing people available to discuss specific needs . 
IBM 's manufacturing staff also will be able to provide software that IBM has developed internally and will be able to form teams with a customer to jointly solve manufacturing problems . 
IBM can obviously bring its expertise to bear on problems related to computer manufacturing , but it could also help customers on software to deal with such things as changes in engineering documents . 
`` We may not have every manufacturing problem , but we have most , '' said George Conrades , IBM 's top marketing official . 
Japan 's Big Four securities firms posted first-half unconsolidated results that mirrored softer performance as a result of slower turnover on the Tokyo Stock Exchange during July and August . 
Figures for the period ended Sept. 30 for the four largest brokerage firms -- Nomura Securities Co. , Daiwa Securities Co. , Yamaichi Securities Co. and Nikko Securities -- also reflected a changeover to a fiscal year ending March 31 , replacing the 12-month term formerly finishing Sept. 30 . 
As a result , brokerage house officials said , appropriate comparisons from the same period a year earlier were unavailable . 
Operating profit , pretax profit and net income results , however , were provided for the immediately preceding six-month period . 
The statistics follow a year-on-year rebound in consolidated and unconsolidated results in the full fiscal year ended in March 1989 , recovering from dismal results in the prior fiscal year as a result of the October 1987 stock market crash . 
Nomura said its pretax profits inched up 0.9 % to 248.91 billion yen ( US$ 1.75 billion ) from 246.60 billion yen in the six months ended March 31 . 
Total operating profit fell 3.1 % to 486.1 billion yen from 501.61 billion yen . 
Net income , however , rose 3.7 % to 107.87 billion yen from 103.98 billion yen . 
Per-share net rose to 55.10 yen from 54.51 yen . 
Daiwa said its pretax profits surged 9.6 % to 171.04 billion yen from 156.12 billion yen in the preceding six-month term . 
Operating profit rose 5.5 % to 332.38 billion yen from 315.12 billion yen . 
Net income jumped 21 % to 79.03 billion yen from 65.53 billion yen . 
Per-share net rose to 62.04 yen from 51.50 yen . 
Yamaichi said its pretax profit increased 8.9 % to 117.94 billion yen from 108.28 billion yen . 
Operating profit rose 5.3 % to 279.75 billion yen from 265.79 billion yen . 
Net income surged 21 % to 55.59 billion yen from 46.02 billion yen . 
Per-share net rose to 47.46 yen from 39.31 yen . 
Nikko 's pretax profit rose 1.6 % to 130.25 billion yen from 128.19 billion yen . 
Operating profit rose 4 % to 293.29 billion yen from 282.08 billion yen . 
Net income rose 23 % to 63.52 billion yen from 51.65 billion yen . 
Per-share net rose to 44.08 yen from 36.13 yen . 
Harken Energy Corp. of Dallas said it will drop its $ 11.75-a-share , or $ 190 million , offer for Tesoro Petroleum Corp. if the two companies do n't have an agreement to merge by Dec. 15 . 
Harken , which made its offer in August , said it still is awaiting a response to its offer from Tesoro 's board . 
Harken also said that its financing from Bankers Trust Co. has been extended until Dec. 15 to give Tesoro 's board time to consider the offer at a Tesoro board meeting scheduled for mid-November . 
Harken , which owns about 800 retail gas stations , has said it is particularly interested in Tesoro 's refinery because it would fill a gap in its business . 
However , Tesoro , based in Houston , already has rejected a suitor in the past year . 
Francis D. John , 35-year-old president , will assume the additional job of chief executive officer . 
He succeeds Paul J. Montle , 42 , who will remain chairman . 
National Environmental also said it will move its headquarters from Hingham to Folcroft , Pa. , the site of its sludge dewatering facility . 
National Environmental , formerly Yankee Cos. , is a sludge treatment company . 
Eagle Clothes Inc. , which is operating under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code , said it reached an agreement with its creditors . 
Under the accord , Albert Roth , chairman and chief executive officer , and Arthur Chase , Sam Beigel , and Louis Polsky will resign as officers and directors of the menswear retailer . 
Mr. Roth , who has been on leave from his posts , will be succeeded by Geoffrie D. Lurie of GDL Management Inc. , which is Eagle 's crisis manager . 
Mr. Lurie is currently co-chief executive . 
Arnold Levine , acting co-chief executive , will continue as senior vice president and a board member . 
Eagle also said it received a commitment for as much as $ 8 million in financing from Norfolk Capital Group Inc . 
In addition , a Norfolk affiliate , York Capital Inc. , will purchase all of the interests of Eagle 's secured lenders , which total $ 11.5 million , and guarantee as much as $ 8.2 million in payments to Eagle 's unsecured creditors . 
A committee representing the unsecured creditors agreed to accept 24 cents on the dollar , Eagle said . 
The plan would extend the period under which Eagle has the exclusive right to file a reorganization plan . 
It would extinguish all of Eagle 's existing capital stock and issue new stock to York as sole holder . 
A bankruptcy court hearing is set for Nov. 3 on these accords . 
In its bankruptcy-law petition , filed in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan , Eagle said its problems began in 1987 and early 1988 when its then-senior lender , Bankers Trust Co. , reduced its credit line . 
In September 1988 , Eagle acquired Biny Clothing Inc. , a closely held New York chain operated under the Bonds name . 
Eagle 's management retired and Biny 's management took control of the company . 
At the time , Eagle reached a new credit agreement with Bankers Trust and with Bank Leumi Trust Co. of New York for $ 8 million , and a new subordinated debt accord with First Century Partners and Biny management for $ 2 million . 
But Eagle said the financing was insufficient and sales during the past fiscal year sagged . 
Under Chapter 11 , a company operates under protection from creditors ' lawsuits while it works out a plan to pay debts . 
Standard & Poor 's Corp. said it would add John H. Harland Co. , an Atlanta check printer , to its 500-stock index , effective at the close of trading on Wednesday . 
American Medical International Inc. , a New York hospital operator , will be deleted from the index at that time . 
American Medical is being acquired . 
The tougher new regulations under the savings-and-loan bailout law are accelerating the thrift industry 's shrinking act . 
Largely to meet tougher new capital requirements , thrifts reduced their assets $ 13.4 billion in August , by selling such assets as mortgage-backed securities and loans . 
Industry assets as of Aug. 31 were $ 1.31 trillion , the lowest since August 1988 . 
As thrifts sell assets to improve their capital-to-asset ratio , as required under the new law passed in August , they must also reduce liabilities , such as deposits . 
As interest rates paid depositors were lowered , thrift withdrawals exceeded deposits by $ 5.1 billion , not including interest credited to accounts . 
It was the third consecutive month in which thrifts shed assets to increase the size of their capital in relation to their assets , the Office of Thrift Supervision said . 
The asset shrinkage was particularly concentrated in several large California institutions . 
`` The downsizing of the thrift industry is well under way , '' said Bert Ely , an industry consultant in Alexandria , Va . 
`` This suggests the bailout law is having a more dramatic effect than anyone would have imagined so soon . '' 
James Barth , an economist with the Office of Thrift Supervision , also attributed some of the outflow to seasonal factors . 
`` August is a month when people are paying school tuition , '' he said . 
`` That and adjustment to the new law were the biggest factors in the industry . '' 
Not including thrifts under government conservatorship , S&Ls reduced their assets by $ 10.1 billion from the previous month , and deposit outflows totaled $ 3.9 billion . 
For the 264 insolvent thrifts under government management at the end of August , assets declined by $ 3.3 billion and withdrawals exceeded deposits by $ 1.2 billion . 
Thrifts raised capital mostly by selling mortgages and mortgage-backed securities , which were reduced by $ 7.8 billion in August from the prior month . 
As of Aug. 31 , thrifts held $ 185 billion in mortgage-backed securities . 
The deposit numbers for August marked a swing back to huge outflows after a July net deposit inflow of $ 54 million -- the only net inflow in more than a year . 
Deposits are n't expected to exceed withdrawals in the foreseeable future , as the industry continues to shrink . 
`` I think we are going to see deposit shrinkage continue , unless we see big changes in rates , '' Mr. Ely said . 
For the first eight months of 1989 , thrifts ' withdrawals exceeded deposits by $ 44.5 billion . 
For the prior year , deposits exceeded withdrawals by $ 8.8 billion . 
The estimates of real gross national product prepared by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in the Department of Commerce significantly understate the rate of economic growth . 
Since the bureau 's estimates for the business sector provide the numerator for the productivity ratios calculated by the Department of Labor , underestimated growth rates artificially depress official productivity statistics . 
If this thesis is correct , it has important implications for macroeconomic policies : It may lower the sense of urgency behind efforts to enact tax incentives and other measures to increase the rate of growth in productivity and real GNP . 
It would also affect the perceptions of the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System , and the informed public generally , as to what constitutes a reasonable degree of price stability . 
In the early 1980s , I predicted a significant acceleration in productivity growth over the rest of the decade . 
This forecast was based on the apparent reversal of most of the negative forces -- such as demographic changes , the oil shock and accelerating inflation -- that had reduced productivity gains in the 1970s . 
There has indeed been more than a one percentage point improvement in productivity growth since 1981 . 
But I had expected more , which is one reason I began looking at evidence suggesting defects in the official output estimates . 
The evidence does not clearly support the view that the downward bias in output growth has become greater during the 1948-89 period , but all I am claiming is that the growth trend is understated . 
( It is , however , possible , that further study will reveal increasing bias . ) 
This bias is in no way deliberate . 
The understatement of growth is due largely to the conservative expedients adopted to deal with deficiencies in basic economic data . 
The first of three major sources of error is the use of labor input estimates ( mainly employment or hours ) instead of output estimates for those sectors , such as governments , paid household services and private non-profit institutions , where there are difficulties in assembling output data . 
This means that no allowance is made for possible increases in output per unit of labor . 
In an unrelated program in which the Labor Department does estimate output per employee for more than two-thirds of federal civilian employees , it found an average annual rate of productivity improvement of 1.7 % during the 1980s . 
Even if it is assumed that productivity rose no more than half as quickly in the rest of the nonbusiness sector , this Labor Department estimate indicates a downward bias in the real GNP estimates of 0.2 percentage point a year , on average . 
The federal productivity estimators use labor input , rather than output , data for their calculations of half of private financial and service industries as well . 
Independent estimates of output in those industries , including one by the Department of Labor for banking , suggests that productivity in finance and services appears to have risen by an average of at least 1.5 % a year between 1948 and 1988 . 
Because finance and services contribute 10 % to final business product , missing these productivity improvements depresses the overall growth rate by 0.15 % a year . 
The second source of error in growth statistics is the use of inappropriate deflators to adjust for price changes . 
I estimate that these mismeasurements as detailed by Martin N. Baily and Robert J. Gordon add a further 0.12 percentage point to the downward bias in the growth rate of real business product . 
Finally , the official estimates understate growth because they make inadequate allowance for improvements in quality of goods and services . 
In 1985 , a new price index for computers adjusted for changes in performance characteristics was introduced , and that resulted in a significantly larger increase in real outlays for durable goods than the earlier estimates had showed . 
Since then , further research argues that failure to take account of quality improvements has contributed a total of at least 0.26 percentage point to the downward bias in the growth rate . 
In sum , the biases ennumerated above indicate a 0.7 percentage point understatement in growth of total real GNP . 
For the private domestic business economy , the bias was a bit over 0.5 percentage point . 
In other words , the growth rates of both total GNP and real private business product per labor hour have been underestimated by about 20 % . 
Mr. Kendrick is professor emeritus of economics at George Washington University . 
He is co-author of `` Personal Productivity : How to Increase Your Satisfaction in Living '' ( M.E. Sharp , 1988 ) . 
Union Carbide Corp. said third-quarter net income plunged 35 % from a year earlier on weakness in the company 's mainstay chemicals and plastics business . 
Net was $ 139 million , or 98 cents a share , for the quarter , compared with $ 213 million , or $ 1.56 a share , a year ago . 
Sales were $ 2.14 billion , up 1.6 % from $ 2.11 billion the previous year . 
Carbide , like other companies with a heavy reliance on the so-called commodity end of the chemicals industry , was expected to post earnings sharply lower than in an exceptionally strong 1988 third quarter . 
But the company 's latest quarter was a few pennies a share lower than the more pessimistic projections on Wall Street . 
`` It certainly was n't a disaster , but it does show weakness '' in some of the company 's chief markets , said George Krug , a chemicals-industry analyst at Oppenheimer & Co . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Carbide closed at $ 24.50 a share , down 50 cents . 
Prices for polyethylene , a common plastic and an important Carbide product , started to fall early this year ; the slide accelerated in the third quarter as buyers continued to trim inventories . 
Prices also fell for ethylene oxide and glycols , products used in making antifreeze . 
Some producers of polyethylene , figuring the inventory reductions are near an end , have announced price boosts . 
The first real test of whether prices have hit bottom may come in the next several weeks , when the new prices become effective . 
A Carbide spokesman said `` the conditions are right for the increase to hold . '' 
For the third quarter , operating profit from Carbide 's chemicals and plastics business fell to $ 238 million from $ 352 million a year ago , before accounting for taxes and interest expense . 
Operating profit from carbon products , such as graphite electrodes , also declined , to $ 6 million from $ 20 million . 
In the industrial-gases segment , operating profit climbed to $ 87 million from $ 58 million . 
The latest quarter included a gain of about $ 62 million on the sale of the company 's urethane polyols and propylene glycols businesses . 
Propylene glycols are used in making personal-care products such as shampoo , and urethane polyols are used in making the polyurethane foam found in furniture cushioning and other products . 
That gain was mostly offset by a loss of about $ 55 million from a write-down in its polysilicon business . 
Polysilicon is used in making integrated circuits . 
For the nine months , net totaled $ 526 million , or $ 3.74 a share , up 5 % from $ 501 million , or $ 3.71 a share , a year ago . 
Sales rose 7.7 % to $ 6.66 billion from $ 6.19 billion . 
At least 10 states are resisting Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. 's nationwide effort to settle its legal troubles , and some might instead try to revoke the firm 's license to sell securities within their borders . 
The reluctance of some states to let Drexel off the hook could hamper the firm 's attempts to polish its image after its guilty plea to six felonies last month , say several people familiar with the discussions . 
Up to now , Drexel has made a rapid-fire series of settlements with 25 states and the commonwealth of Puerto Rico . 
Just yesterday , New Hampshire announced it made a $ 75,000 settlement with Drexel , a record-tying fine for a securities-law matter in that state . 
These states have been entering into settlements with Drexel as part of the firm 's efforts to operate freely anywhere in the U.S. despite its record as an admitted felon . 
But individuals familiar with the generally successful Drexel talks say the firm is meeting resistance from some big states , including New Jersey , New York , California , Pennsylvania , Connecticut and Missouri . 
Officials in some of these states say they do n't want to simply accept the settlements offered by Drexel . 
They question if Drexel is getting easier treatment than the many small penny-stock firms whose brokerage licenses are routinely revoked . 
Drexel has to settle with state securities regulators in the wake of its criminal guilty plea and a related civil settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission that includes payment of $ 650 million in penalties . 
These stem from a two-year federal investigation of insider trading and securities fraud on Wall Street . 
Ohio , the District of Columbia , Tennessee and Illinois have been less resistant to Drexel than the other six states , but nonetheless have refused to settle so far , say those familiar with the discussions . 
Drexel says it does n't expect any of its state brokerage licenses will be revoked , and even if some are , its securities business would n't be directly hurt . 
It already has sold its retail , or individual-investor , brokerage network ; securities firms do n't need brokerage licenses for non-retail activities such as investment banking . 
Still , if nothing else , a revoked brokerage license could be a burden because it must be disclosed in many of the transactions in which Drexel could be involved . 
Securities regulators praise Drexel for its energetic effort , led by government-approved general counsel Saul S. Cohen , to settle its legal problems with the states . 
But they disagree about the message these settlements give to the public . 
`` There was a lot of internal debate about that specific issue , '' said Susan Bryant , Oklahoma 's chief securities regulator and president of the North American Securities Administrators Association , which drafted a voluntary settlement plan for the states with Drexel . 
The question , she said , is whether Drexel should be allowed to pay and move on , or `` whether you should ( simply ) revoke the license when someone is convicted of a felony . '' 
While Ms. Bryant 's state went ahead and accepted Drexel 's settlement offer of $ 25,000 , she said : `` I do n't have any argument with those who came to different conclusions . 
I can see both sides . '' 
Similarly , Alfred Rubega , New Hampshire 's director of securities regulation , said his state had n't received any complaints about Drexel , so it really could n't press the issue . 
Still , `` I understand the reasons '' that other states are holding out , he said . 
Mr. Cohen , the Drexel general counsel , said , `` I do n't think , as we say in investment banking , that ` by the end of the day ' we 'll be losing any licenses . '' 
Asked about states that are taking a hard line , he said , `` There are states that have asked for additional information , which we are providing to them . '' 
Mr. Cohen said more than $ 2.8 million has been paid to 26 states and that Drexel still expects to pay out a total of $ 11.5 million . 
By the end of this week , Drexel should have another three to four settlements , Mr. Cohen said . 
`` The rate we 're going , I think that by the end of the month , we 're looking to have a total of 30 to 35 , '' he said . 
That total would be important for Drexel . 
The investment bank has previously announced that as part of its punishment it would create an independent foundation to promote ethical behavior in the securities industry . 
A proviso to that promise is that a minimum of 35 states reach settlement agreements before next Tuesday . 
There are , according to several securities commissioners , at least 16 states that are either close to settlements with Drexel or who do n't appear opposed to settling . 
Drexel 's proposed state fines have been based on a state 's population and on the size of Drexel 's business in the state . 
New Jersey , for example , was asked to accept $ 300,000 , but refused . 
The state is n't ruling out revoking Drexel 's brokerage license . 
The state can also bar Drexel as an investment adviser . 
State officials wo n't describe their position in detail , but James McLelland Smith , state securities chief , said : `` We really are still looking at it and have informed ( Drexel ) that the proposal is really not sufficient for settlement . '' 
Connecticut already has issued a `` notice of intent '' to revoke Drexel 's brokerage license . 
It is one of the states that have met with Mr. Cohen and asked for additional information about investors ' accounts and other matters . 
`` This particular issue goes to the very integrity of the capital-formation market , '' state Banking Commissioner Howard Brown said . 
A banking department spokesman added : `` Commissioner Brown does n't feel that money alone is the issue here . '' 
Particularly touchy are the cases of New York , which is Drexel 's base , and California , the base of Drexel 's highly profitable junk-bond operation that led to the firm 's legal difficulties . 
Neither state has settled , and officials in the two states wo n't discuss their reasons for not doing so . 
But Drexel has made it clear it could mount a significant legal battle in each state if its license is revoked , according to state officials . 
Ms. Bryant , the head of the state securities group , said Drexel has done a better job of settling with the states than E.F. Hutton did after its guilty plea to a massive check-kiting scheme several years ago . 
Still , she said , Drexel 's trouble with some states is n't a bad thing . 
`` This process should point out that it 's not going to be easy for a firm that 's convicted of a felony to immediately jump back into the retail business , '' Ms. Bryant said . 
`` We need to have somebody worried so they do n't do this again . '' 
These are the 26 states , including the commonwealth of Puerto Rico , that have settled with Drexel : Alaska , Arkansas , Delaware , Georgia , Hawaii , Idaho , Indiana , Iowa , Kansas , Kentucky , Maine , Maryland , Minnesota , Mississippi , New Hampshire , New Mexico , North Dakota , Oklahoma , Oregon , South Carolina , South Dakota , Utah , Vermont , Washington , Wyoming and Puerto Rico . 
Time Warner Inc. reported a third-quarter net loss of $ 176 million , or $ 2.88 cents a share , reflecting acquisition costs for a 59.3 % stake in Warner Communications Inc. and the purchase method of accounting for the transaction . 
Separately , Warner reported a net loss of $ 106 million , or 56 cents a share , including merger expenses of $ 100 million and $ 120 million in charges associated with stock-appreciation-based compensation plans . 
Time Warner is in the process of completing its acquisition of the remaining Warner shares . 
Time Warner emphasized in a news release that it should be evaluated based on its cash flow , which the company defined as earnings before interest , taxes , depreciation and amortization . 
On a pro-forma basis , assuming the merger was effective Jan 1 , 1988 , including the results from both Time Inc. and all of Warner , that cash flow figure would be $ 526 million for the latest quarter , more than double the comparable figure a year ago , or $ 242 million , according to Time Warner . 
Some analysts at least are buying that argument , and were n't alarmed by the losses . 
`` What really matters is the operating income of the divisions : I look at these numbers and I say , these businesses are doing well , '' said Mark Manson , a vice president of Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp . 
`` For example , Warner made more than $ 100 million from filmed entertainment in three months . 
That 's a big number . 
Warner also had a gain of more than 13 % from records and music publishing , even though the domestic record business was sluggish this summer . '' 
In the year-ago third quarter , Time on its own reported net income of $ 81 million , or $ 1.42 a share . 
Combined revenue for the latest quarter of Time Warner was $ 2.2 billion , compared with the year-ago Time revenue of $ 1.1 billion . 
On a pro forma basis , including all of Warner 's earnings , Time Warner had a third-quarter loss of $ 217 million , compared with a $ 342 million loss a year earlier . 
On the same basis , revenue rose to $ 2.7 billion from $ 2.2 billion . 
For the third quarter , Warner 's $ 106 million loss compared with a year-ago loss of $ 113 million , or 90 cents a share . 
Revenue rose to $ 1.5 billion from $ 1.1 billion . 
The 1988 figures were restated to include the results of Lorimar Telepictures Corp. , which Warner acquired in January . 
Time Warner 's operating earnings got a boost from Warner 's record box-office results . 
`` Batman '' alone has racked up more than $ 247 million in box-office receipts to date , making it Warner Bros . ' largest grossing film ever . 
`` Lethal Weapon II '' was also a big hit . 
Warner also contributed record results from its music business , where unit sales of compact discs rose more than 50 % from a year ago , the company said , helped by Prince 's `` Batman '' soundtrack . 
Time Warner said its cable division turned in a 77 % increase in operating cash flow , to $ 166 million from $ 94 million , reflecting higher per-subscriber revenue . 
In addition , the 1988 results included a $ 20 million charge reflecting a reserve for relocation related expenses at American Television & Communications Corp . 
On the other hand , Time Warner said its operating cash flow declined in the quarter for its magazine division , its books division and the Home Box Office programming division . 
In magazines , higher advertising revenues at Sports Illustrated and Fortune were offset by lower ad revenue for other major magazines . 
The programming division saw a decline in operating cash flow because the year-ago quarter included a $ 12 million dividend from Turner Broadcasting System and because the quarter includes expenses associated with the Nov. 15 launch of HBO 's Comedy Channel . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Time Warner closed at $ 138.625 a share , up $ 1.875 , while Warner closed at $ 63.875 a share , up 12.5 cents . 
Robert J. Penn , president and chief executive officer , will take early retirement from this steelmaker Dec 31 . 
William S. Leavitt , chairman , said Mr. Penn , 58 years old , would continue as a consultant and would work with the board in selecting a successor . 
UNR recently emerged from bankruptcy-law proceedings that left 64 % of the reorganized company 's common stock in the hands of trustees of an asbestos-disease claims trust . 
The company said it would have no further comment . 
Mr. Leavitt , 37 , was elected chairman earlier this year by the company 's new board , having served as vice president for legal and corporate affairs . 
His father , David S. Leavitt , was chairman and chief executive until his death in an accident five years ago , at which time Mr. Penn was named president . 
Some House Democrats are trying to head off an appointment by President Bush to the board that oversees the savings-and-loan bailout , contending that the prospective nominee is the head of troubled banks himself . 
Four Democrats on the House Banking Committee sent President Bush a letter stating their concerns about the expected appointment of James Simmons , an Arizona banker and former fund-raiser for Mr. Bush , to the Oversight Board of the Resolution Trust Corp . 
The Oversight Board , created in the savings-and-loan law signed in August , sets policy for the RTC , which will sell hundreds of the nation 's sick thrifts and billions of dollars of their assets . 
Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady , Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Jack Kemp are members of the board . 
President Bush must appoint two other members , one a Democrat and one a Republican . 
An administration official confirmed last week that Mr. Simmons , the chairman of Valley National Bank in Phoenix , is the Republican appointee , and that a security clearance was under way . 
The Democratic appointee has n't been determined , the official said . 
Mr. Simmons declined to comment , and the White House said the congressmen 's letter is under review . 
The letter , dated last Thursday , cited the losses at Valley National , and at United Bank , also of Phoenix , where Mr. Simmons was chairman for 29 years . 
Both banks have been battered , as have other Arizona banks , by falling real estate prices . 
Valley National , for example , had $ 470 million in problem assets as of June . 
`` We believe that there are numerous other candidates more qualified for this important position and we encourage you to give them your thorough consideration before making this key RTC appointment , '' the letter said . 
`` The RTC needs the most able , competent management available . '' 
But Mr. Simmons has long ties to both Republicans and banking . 
He was co-chairman of Mr. Bush 's Arizona campaign committee in last year 's election , and also worked for Mr. Bush in the 1980 election . 
The two met more than 30 years ago , when Mr. Simmons worked for Commercial Bank & Trust Co. of Midland , Texas , where Mr. Bush was an organizing director . 
In 1986 , Mr. Simmons also served on a committee of businessmen headed by William Seidman , chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. and the Resolution Trust Corp . 
That committee determined to open Arizona to banking across state lines . 
Arizona Trend magazine referred to Mr. Simmons this year as one of the 25 most influential people in the state . 
The letter to Mr. Bush was signed by Reps. Bruce Vento ( D. , Minn. ) , the chairman of the Banking Committee 's RTC Task Force , Thomas McMillen ( D. , Md. ) , Kweisi Mfume ( D. , Md . ) and Paul Kanjorski ( D. , Pa . ) . 
Randolph W. McElroy , a vice chairman of this bank-holding company , was named to the additional position of chairman of its principal unit , Sovran Bank . 
Mr. McElroy , 54 years old , will remain president and chief executive officer of the unit . 
Sovran also named John B. Werner a vice chairman of the parent company and the unit and elected him to the newly created position of chief credit officer of Sovran Financial , increasing the number of corporate board members to 35 . 
Mr. Werner , 58 , was formerly senior executive vice president of the parent company and the unit . 
Moody 's Investors Service Inc. said it lowered the debt ratings of certain long-term debt held by this company . 
The debt-rating concern cited the bank 's move into the Texas market , noting its profitability and capital adequacy measurements will be depressed relative to the bank 's past performance . 
Moody 's also said it raised its rating on the Deposit Insurance Bridge Bank , now known as Bank One , Texas N.A. , reflecting the support of other banking affiliates and substantial assistance for the FDIC . 
Officials at the New York bank-holding company were n't available for comment on the debt-rating changes . 
At Lloyd 's of London , underwriters still scratch out policies using fountain pens and blotting paper . 
Visitors are ushered into the premises by red-frocked doormen known as waiters , a reminder of the insurance market 's origins in a coffeehouse in 17th century London . 
Such trappings suggest a glorious past but give no hint of a troubled present . 
Lloyd 's , once a pillar of the world insurance market , is being shaken to its very foundation . 
The 301-year-old exchange is battered by enormous claims from a decade-long run of unprecedented disasters , the most recent of which is last week 's earthquake in California 's Bay Area . 
At the same time , Lloyd 's is besieged by disgruntled investors and hamstrung by inefficient but time-honored ways of conducting business . 
The exchange is gradually being squeezed into narrow , less-profitable segments of the market by less hidebound competitors . 
`` Lloyd 's is on the ropes , '' says Peter Nutting , a Lloyd 's investor for 17 years who now leads a dissident group threatening to sue exchange underwriters for alleged mismanagement and negligence . 
`` It needs more discipline . 
It needs to sort itself out . '' 
Most troublesome is the shrinking pool of `` names , '' the well-heeled investors ( some of them royal ) who , as members of about 360 syndicates , underwrite policies . 
Some 1,750 members quit the exchange last year , more than triple the number of resignations in 1987 . 
Names are resigning at an even faster pace this year . 
Lackluster returns are one reason . 
The average after-tax return on investment in 1986 , the most recent year for which results are available , was 6.5 % , according to Chatset Ltd. , an insurance consulting firm in London . 
In 1985 , it was 2.1 % . 
Between 1981 and 1986 , the most recent five-year period for which figures are available , Lloyd 's reported over # 3.6 billion in claims and reserves against future losses ( $ 5.7 billion at today 's exchange rates ) , more than double the # 1.35 billion posted in the previous five-year period . 
Many of the 31,329 investors who remain are beginning to question one of the exchange 's most basic tenets , the concept of unlimited personal liability . 
Investors may reap huge profits when premiums exceed claims , but they are liable to their last pound or dollar in the event of a catastrophe . 
And catastrophes are getting ever more costly . 
Lloyd 's claims for the 1988 Piper Alpha oil-rig disaster in the North Sea , for instance , may reach $ 1 billion . 
During the five-year period ended 1986 , roughly 80 % of the names had money tied up in money-losing syndicates , according to Chatset consultants . 
The peril of unlimited liability looms large for a number of them now . 
`` I have wished I could die and be out of it -- that 's how bad it is , '' Betty Atkins , a secretary from suburban London , says . 
Ms. Atkins , whose Lloyd 's membership was a bonus from a former employer in 1981 , belongs to Mr. Nutting 's dissident group on the Outhwaite syndicate , which has been hard hit by asbestos reinsurance claims . 
Ms. Atkins , who underwrote # 20,000 , or about $ 32,000 , of insurance coverage on that syndicate , now faces potential losses of roughly # 70,000 , or $ 111,000 . 
`` If Lloyd 's wants # 70,000 out of me they will have to take everything I 've got -- and even then I do n't know if it will be enough , '' she says . 
Unease is widespread among exchange members . 
`` I ca n't think of any reason to join Lloyd 's now , '' says Keith Whitten , a British businessman and a Lloyd 's member since 1979 . 
`` The downside is very considerable , and at the moment the upside is very marginal . '' 
If profits do n't improve , Mr. Whitten says he may quit the exchange . 
Meanwhile , competition from rivals unencumbered by history is intensifying . 
Lloyd 's is being squeezed out of low-margin but more consistently profitable product lines such as primary property and marine insurance . 
Over the past decade , competitors have chipped away at the exchange 's share of the # 2.5 billion marine market in London , where half the world 's ships are insured . 
Lloyd 's 66 % stake in that market has shrunk to 50 % in that period , according to an official at the Institute of London Underwriters , a Lloyd 's competitor . 
( The official asked not to be named . ) 
Much of the business has gone to the institute , an association of more than 100 insurers , including Cigna Corp. , Allianz Versicherungs AG of West Germany and Britain 's Commercial Union Assurance PLC . 
Lloyd 's has endured decades of genteel decline . 
At the peak of its power and influence a century ago , Lloyd 's dominated the insurance world with a 50 % stake . 
It virtually dictated how ships were to be built and it monitored commerce through a unrivaled intelligence network in ports around the globe . 
Today , Lloyd 's share of the world market , excluding life insurance , is about 2 % . 
( Its stake is even smaller if life insurance is included . ) 
Bigger rivals , such as Aetna and Allianz , backed by armies of statisticians using computers in hundreds of branches , operate more efficiently and often can offer lower rates , brokers say . 
Though Lloyd 's pioneered such now-standard policies as worker 's compensation insurance , burglary insurance for homeowners and businesses , and bankers ' liability insurance , competitors now underwrite most of that business . 
Beyond that , many big oil , chemical and airline companies are siphoning off big chunks of the market by insuring themselves through `` captive '' offshore companies for industry-specific coverage . 
Even Lloyd 's specialty -- unusually risky ventures -- is being challenged . 
Only 10 years ago , for instance , Lloyd 's was the pre-eminent insurer of thoroughbred horses . 
But since 1981 , Kirk Horse Insurance Inc. of Lexington , Ky. has grabbed a 20 % stake of the market . 
Ronald Kirk , president , says Lloyd 's has suffered because its structure does n't allow underwriters to deal directly with clients ; brokers are required intermediaries . 
Thus , he asserts , Lloyd 's ca n't react quickly to competition . 
`` Lloyd 's has lost control of the situation , '' he says . 
`` They are n't controlling their destiny like they used to . '' 
Murray Lawrence , Lloyd 's chairman , agrees the exchange faces big challenges . 
`` This is a watershed time , and we are trying to plot our way ahead , '' he says . 
`` We have been a great market for inventing risks which other people then take , copy and cut rates . '' 
Lloyd 's , he says , is cut off from `` the vast body of premium down at the bottom end which acts as a steadying influence '' against catastrophic losses . 
By that , he means low-margin but low-risk products such as certain types of primary property insurance . 
The exchange , he says , must find new products and new markets . 
That wo n't be an easy task . 
Tradition is dictator at Lloyd 's . 
Three years ago , the exchange took up residence in a space-age tower of steel and glass -- evocative of the kind of modern architecture that Britain 's Prince Charles has denounced . 
( Some exchange wags call the building `` the oil rig . '' ) 
But along with such treasured artifacts as Lord Nelson 's spyglass , Lloyd 's also brought its outmoded ways of doing business . 
The Lloyd 's market actively underwrites insurance just 4 1\/2 hours a day , brokers say . 
Underwriting does n't get under way until after morning tea at 10 a.m . 
A two-hour lunch break follows . 
Things wind down at about 4:30 p.m. , just in time for afternoon tea . 
Lloyd 's vast trading hall houses a warren of well-polished desks . 
The hall 's few computers are used mostly to send messages . 
Sandwiched between desks , underwriters sit on benches surrounded by stacks of policies . 
Brokers clutching thick folders stand in lines , waiting their turn to speak to the underwriters . 
A broker may have to approach as many as 20 underwriters who insure the endeavors on behalf of the syndicates . 
It could take six months for a claim to be paid . 
`` The system , '' says Nicholas Samengo-Turner , a Lloyd 's broker who left the exchange in 1985 , `` is so ludicrously unprofessional it drives you mad . '' 
Some maintain underwriters also have been inept . 
John Wetherell , a Lloyd 's underwriter , says he and his fellow underwriters underestimated by as much as 50 % the premiums they should have charged for property risks from 1980 to 1985 . 
`` How unprofessional we must have appeared to the outside world -- how incompetent at risk assessment and evaluation , '' he says . 
Lloyd 's officials decline to comment on the matter . 
More recently , property rates have increased . 
Many at Lloyd 's expect the San Francisco earthquake will cause the industry to boost rates even further . 
But it will be years before it is clear whether higher rates will offset the payouts for such disasters . 
The magnitude of the exchange 's problems may not become known for some time because of Lloyd 's practice of leaving the books open for three years to allow for the settlement of claims . 
Lloyd 's only recently reported its financial results for 1986 . 
That year , it posted record pretax profit of # 650 million , a gain it attributes to higher rates and fewer claims . 
But Mr. Lawrence says reported profit will be down in 1987 , 1988 and 1989 , though he declines to specify how steep the decline will be . 
Insurance analysts say the exchange 's downturn in profitability is likely to be aggravated by more than $ 600 million in aviation losses ( including the 1988 Pan Am airline disaster over Lockerbie , Scotland ) and a still-uncalculated chunk of claims from September 's Hurricane Hugo . 
Lloyd 's says the departures of names is n't likely to hurt its underwriting capacity , currently about # 11 billion . 
Mr. Lawrence says the drain of funds has been offset by an increase in investments by the remaining names . 
Meanwhile , the exchange has been trying to lower costs . 
( It recently cut its work force by 9 % , or 213 . ) 
But Lloyd 's is hampered in its efforts to overhaul operations by its reluctance to embrace modern technology . 
Mr. Wetherell , the underwriter , reckons half of his business could be transacted by computer , cutting costs at least 10 % . 
Though Lloyd 's has talked for years about computerizing underwriting transactions , the effort has n't gotten very far . 
Competition among underwriters and brokers makes them loath to centralize price and policy information . 
Both groups cling to traditional face-to-face dealings , even for routine policies . 
Lloyd 's overblown bureaucracy also hampers efforts to update marketing strategies . 
Some underwriters have been pressing for years to tap the low-margin business by selling some policies directly to consumers . 
Lloyd 's presently sells only auto insurance directly to the public , and such policies are sold only in limited markets such as the U.K. and Canada . 
But such changes must be cleared by four internal committees and dozens of underwriters , brokers and administrators before being implemented . 
The proposal to sell directly to the public remains mired in bureaucratic quicksand . 
Lloyd 's is moving forward on some fronts , though . 
Mr. Lawrence says the exchange is updating some procedures to make speedier payments on claims . 
By next year , all underwriters will be linked to a communications network that could reduce paper work on claims . 
Japan 's Daiwa Securities Co. named Masahiro Dozen president . 
Mr. Dozen succeeds Sadakane Doi , who will become vice chairman . 
Yoshitoki Chino retains his title of chairman of Daiwa , Japan 's second-largest securities firm . 
In Japanese firms , the president usually is in charge of day-to-day operations , while the chairman 's role is more a ceremonial one . 
The title of chief executive officer is n't used . 
While people within Daiwa , particularly internationalists , expected that Mr. Dozen , 52 , would eventually become Daiwa 's president , the speed of his promotion surprised many . 
It was only earlier this year that the jovial , easygoing executive -- he likes to joke with Americans about how his name is synonymous with twelve -- was appointed deputy president . 
Mr. Dozen is taking over the reins of a securities company that does very well in its domestic market but that is still seeking to realize its potential in global investment banking and securities dealing . 
Daiwa is one of the world 's largest securities firms . 
As of March 31 , the Daiwa group had shareholder equity of 801.21 billion yen ( $ 5.64 billion ) . 
For the six months ended Sept. 30 , Daiwa reported unconsolidated ( parent company ) net income of 79.03 billion yen ( $ 556.5 million ) on revenue of 332.38 billion yen ( $ 2.34 billion ) . 
Both figures were record highs . 
Several observers interpreted Mr. Dozen 's appointment as an attempt by Daiwa to make its international operations more profitable while preparing the firm for the effects of the continuing deregulation of Japan 's domestic markets , which should mean increased competition . 
All of Japan 's so-called Big Four securities firms -- Nomura Securities Co. Ltd. , the world 's largest , Nikko Securities Co. Ltd. , Yamaichi Securities Co. Ltd. and Daiwa -- have suffered setbacks in their attempts to break into foreign markets . 
While they have moved to the fore in underwriting fixed-income securities in the Eurobond market -- mostly for Japanese firms -- they have been only marginally profitable , if at all , in the U.S. . 
American institutional investors have never had a large appetite for Japanese equities . 
And while the Japanese have stepped up their purchases of U.S. shares in the past several months , they have shown themselves in the past to be fickle investors . 
At the same time , Daiwa and its brethren have faced stiff competition from well-entrenched American competitors that have prevented them from building strong links to U.S. corporations and institutional investors . 
Mr. Dozen knows these problems firsthand . 
When he arrived in the U.S. in 1969 -- the start of an eight-year tour -- he tried selling Japanese yen-denominated bonds to U.S. investors . 
`` He made desperate efforts , using the yellow pages from beginning to end , '' said Koji Yoneyama , president of Daiwa 's U.S. unit . 
`` But not a single piece of paper was sold . '' 
By his own account , Mr. Dozen did n't do much better with U.S. bonds . 
In an interview a few months ago , he recalled how after some training at Salomon Brothers Inc. , he successfully bid for the opportunity to sell portions of 20 U.S. corporate bond issues . 
But he could n't sell any . 
`` Japanese stock salesmen selling American bonds ? 
Maybe it 's crazy , '' he said . 
Mr. Dozen even related the indignity suffered when he and two colleagues went on an overnight fishing expedition off the New Jersey shore and caught nothing . 
Upon returning to New York , `` Exhausted , I got into a taxicab , and the woman driver said : ` Americans make better fishermen , ' '' he recalled . 
Undaunted , Mr. Dozen said that Daiwa 's goal is to build `` a high-technology oriented international organization with maybe some Japanese flavor to it . '' 
He said that he was particularly interested in his firm gaining expertise in futures , options , mortgaged-backed securities , computerized trading and investment systems as well as mergers and acquisitions . 
Mr. Dozen said Daiwa 's strengths were its large capital base , its influential position in the Tokyo market and its links to Japanese corporations and institutional investors . 
Mr. Dozen joined Daiwa upon his graduation from Kyoto University in 1959 . 
Like many young recruits in Japanese securities firms , he began his career peddling stock to individual investors . 
In his climb to the top , Mr. Dozen also headed the company 's stock-exchange division , its fixed-income units and its international operations . 
`` He was constantly picking up new things to fill out his experience ; he is very well-balanced , '' said Takuro Isoda , chairman of Daiwa 's U.S. unit in New York . 
But it Mr. Dozen 's experience as a salesman that enabled him to gain the political support -- particularly from the retail sales force -- to accede to the presidency . 
Commission income from domestic stock and bond sales accounts form a large portion of Japanese securities companies ' earnings . 
And anybody who lacked the backing of the retail sales force `` would be fragile , '' said a Daiwa executive . 
If Mr. Dozen has a weakness , it may be his golf game . 
`` He digs in the sand instead of hitting the ball , like a farmer , '' said Mr. Yoneyama . 
Inco Ltd. posted a 35 % decline in third-quarter net income , a performance that was in line with analysts ' expectations . 
The nickel producer also raised its quarterly dividend to 25 cents a share from 20 cents and said it may buy back as much as 4.8 % of its common outstanding . 
Inco shares fell after the announcements . 
Analysts said some investors were disappointed that the cash-rich company had failed to announce a special dividend . 
Inco closed at $ 31.125 a share , down 62.5 cents , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
Some analysts said Inco , which had cash reserves of $ 272 million as of Sept. 30 , could still announce a special dividend in the next few months , though it would be smaller than the $ 10-a-share special dividend it paid last year . 
The quarterly dividend is payable Dec. 1 to shares of record Nov. 3 . 
Inco 's net fell to $ 129.3 million , or $ 1.23 a share , in the third quarter from $ 200.3 million , or $ 1.88 a share , a year earlier . 
Sales rose 8.2 % to $ 848.7 million from $ 784.5 million . 
Excluding special gains from tax-loss carry-forwards , earnings in the latest quarter were $ 117.7 million , or $ 1.12 a share , compared with $ 187.4 million , or $ 1.76 a share . 
Inco said the drop in earnings resulted mainly from lower nickel prices for the period and a temporary cut in nickel output at the company 's Manitoba operations due to high levels of arsenic in the ore . 
Inco said it plans to buy back as many as five million common shares over the next 12 months if nickel market conditions are favorable . 
Under a previous buyback program , Inco has purchased 1.7 million of its shares since April . 
UAL Corp. 's board quashed any prospects for an immediate revival of a labor-management buy-out , saying United Airlines ' parent should remain independent for now . 
As a result , UAL 's chairman , Stephen M. Wolf , pulled out of the buy-out effort to focus on running the company . 
The two developments put the acquisition attempt back to square one and leaves the airline with an array of unresolved matters , including an unsettled labor situation and a management scrambling to restore its damaged credibility . 
The effort to create the nation 's largest employee-owned company began unraveling Oct. 13 when the labor-management group was unable to obtain financing for its $ 300-a-share , $ 6.79 billion offer . 
Just last week it suffered another major setback when British Airways PLC , the largest equity investor in the labor-management bid , withdrew its support . 
Takeover stock traders , focusing on the company 's intention to stay independent , took the announcement as bad news . 
UAL , which had risen $ 9.875 to $ 178.375 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange on reports of a new bid being prepared by the group , reversed course and plummeted in off-exchange trading after the 5:09 p.m. EDT announcement . 
Among the first trades reported by the securities firm of Jefferies & Co. , which makes a market in UAL after the exchange is closed , were 10,000 shares at $ 170 , 6,000 shares at $ 162 , 2,500 at $ 162 , and 10,000 at $ 158 . 
The rebound in UAL stock during regular trading hours Monday was its first daily gain after six consecutive losses left the price 41 % below its level before Oct. 13 , the day the group announced the bank financing could n't be obtained for the original deal . 
Twelve of UAL 's outside directors met at a five-hour meeting yesterday in Chicago to consider an informal proposal from the buy-out group for a revised bid . 
But the board said it was n't interested for now . 
That proposal , valued at between $ 225 and $ 240 a share , would have transferred majority ownership to employees while leaving some stock in public hands . 
The buy-out group had no firm financing for the plan . 
And , with no other offers on the table , the board apparently felt no pressure to act on it . 
The directors signaled , however , that they would be willing to consider future offers or take some other action to maximize shareholder value , saying they would continue to explore `` all strategic and financial alternatives . '' 
But it was clear that for the time being , the board wants the company to return to normalcy . 
The board said it concluded that `` the welfare of the company , its shareholders , its employees and the broader public ... can best be enhanced by continued development of UAL as a strong , viable , independent company . '' 
Mr. Wolf urged all employees to `` now turn their full attention '' to operating the airline . 
He also vowed to `` make every effort to nurture ... a constructive new relationship that has been forged with participating employee groups . '' 
But Mr. Wolf faces a monumental task in pulling the company back together again . 
Labor problems top the list . 
For a brief time , the buy-out effort seemed to solve his problems with United 's pilot union . 
In return for an ownership stake in the company , the pilots were willing to agree to a seven-year contract that included a no-strike clause and significant wage concessions and productivity gains the union previously resisted . 
That contract was tied to the success of the buy-out . 
As a `` good-will measure , '' the pilots had been working four extra hours a month and had agreed to fly UAL 's two new Boeing 747-400 aircraft . 
It 's uncertain if the pilots will continue to do so without a contract settlement . 
The union said late last night that it is still committed to majority employee ownership and that the labor disputes that faced the company prior to the buy-out effort `` still need to be addressed . '' 
The buy-out effort also worsened already-strained relations between United 's pilot and machinist unions . 
The machinists ' criticisms of the labor-management bid and their threats of a strike unless they received substantial wage increases this year helped cool banks ' interest in financing the transaction . 
The machinists previously had shown themselves to be an ally to Mr. Wolf , but he lost much of his credibility with that group when he teamed up with the pilot union . 
The machinists criticized the terms Mr. Wolf and management received in the buy-out . 
They paid $ 15 million for a 1 % stake and received an additional 9 % of the company at no additional cost . 
His credibility is also on the line in the investment community . 
Until the collapse of this bid , Mr. Wolf was regarded as one of the nation 's savviest airline executives after engineering turnarounds of Tiger International Inc. and Republic Airlines . 
But he and his chief financial officer , John Pope , sowed some of the seeds for the deal 's failure by insisting banks accept low financing fees and interest rates , while they invested in the transaction only a small fraction of the $ 114.3 million they stood to gain from sale of their UAL stock and options . 
The board 's actions leave takeover stock traders nursing some $ 700 million in losses and eager to respond to anyone who might make a new offer . 
It also inevitably leaves a residue of shareholder lawsuits . 
Arbitragers said they were disappointed the company did n't announce some recapitalization or other plan to maximize value . 
One takeover expert noted that arbitragers could force a recapitalization through the written consent process under which holders may oust the board by a majority vote . 
The machinists union has suggested it may propose a recapitalization that includes a special dividend for holders and a minority ownership stake for employees . 
Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis , whose $ 240-a-share offer for UAL in August triggered a bidding war , says he remains interested in the airline . 
However , he is restricted from making certain hostile moves by an agreement he signed to obtain confidential UAL data . 
Essentially , he ca n't make any hostile moves unless he makes a tender offer at least $ 300 a share . 
Tandy Corp. said it wo n't join U.S. Memories , the group that seeks to battle the Japanese in the market for computer memory chips . 
Tandy 's decision is a second setback for U.S. Memories . 
Last month , Apple Computer Inc. said that it would n't invest in the group . 
Apple said that its money would be better spent in areas such as research and development . 
U.S. Memories is seeking major investors to back its attempt to crack the $ 10 billion market for dynamic random access memory chips , a market dominated by the Japanese . 
Those chips were in dire shortage last year , hurting many U.S. computer companies that could n't get sufficient Japanese-supplied chips . 
Tandy said its experience during the shortage did n't merit the $ 5 million to $ 50 million investment U.S. Memories is seeking from each investor . 
`` At this time , we elected not to get involved because we have been able to satisfy our need { for DRAMs } from the market as a rule , '' said Ed Juge , Tandy 's director of market planning . 
Sanford Kane , U.S. Memories president , said the decision was `` disappointing , '' but does n't presage U.S. Memories ' failure . 
`` I would like to have had them , '' he said . 
But `` they were n't on my list of companies who were critical to be a part of it . '' 
Mr. Kane became president and chief executive officer of U.S. Memories last June , when the group was formed by seven electronics companies : Advanced Micro Devices Inc. , Digital Equipment Corp. ; Hewlett-Packard Co. ; Intel Corp. ; International Business Machines Corp. ; LSI Logic Corp. and National Semiconductor Corp . 
Mr. Kane said he expects two or three major corporations to announce their participation in U.S. Memories soon after the group finishes a business plan , probably late this week . 
U.S. Memories needs a catalyst , he said , to inspire others to join . 
But so far , most potential participants have n't decided . 
Sun Microsystems Inc. said it 's still actively evaluating U.S. Memories and plans to meet with U.S. Memories representatives later this week . 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. said it was waiting to see U.S. Memories ' business plan . 
Personal-computer maker AST Research Inc. said it is still studying the situation . 
A Compaq Computer Corp. spokeswoman said that the company has n't made a decision yet , although `` it is n't under active consideration . 
In a startling turnabout , Members of the Senate Intelligence Committee are complaining that someone in the executive branch is leaking on them . 
David Boren , the Intelligence Committee chairman , is upset that someone leaked a letter to the committee from the Reagan administration suggesting that the U.S. would undertake to warn Panamanian thug Manuel Noriega if it got wind of an impending coup that might result in his assassination . 
With due respect to `` highly classified correspondence '' and other buzzwords , the leakers are performing a public service . 
If the CIA has become a protection service for Mr. Noriega , the American people ought to know . 
What went wrong in Panama is a fitting subject for public and congressional inquiry . 
Naturally , Senator Boren and his committee would like free rein to blame the executive branch while stamping `` top secret '' on their own complicity . 
But there 's no danger of exposing sources and methods in disclosing the debate running up and down Pennsylvania Avenue . 
And if Congress is going to assume authority to micromanage foreign policy , it 's going to have to take some of the responsibility too . 
The President of the United States urged the Panamanian armed forces to move against Mr. Noriega . 
When they did , his commanders did n't have the initiative to do more than block a couple of roads . 
The executive branch bears the first responsibility for timidity . 
But what kind of initiative can you expect given the climate set by Congress ? 
For example , what exactly did the CIA tell Major Giroldi and his fellow coup plotters about U.S. laws and executive orders on assassinations ? 
What part did U.S. warnings play in the major 's unwillingness to pull the trigger when he had General Noriega in custody , but was under attack by pro-Noriega troops ? 
Mr. Noriega did n't suffer from any hesitation once he had the pistol . 
Maybe we need a CIA version of the Miranda warning : You have the right to conceal your coup intentions , because we may rat on you . 
Or maybe a Surgeon General 's warning : Confiding in the United States may be fatal . 
CIA chief William Webster , hardly a Washington malcontent , got the debate started last week by noting that the executive order banning assassinations had contributed to U.S. paralysis during the coup . 
The CIA 's Deputy Director of Operations , Richard Stoltz , tried to smooth things over a few days later , but instead simply underlined Mr. Webster 's point . 
`` The interpretation '' of the executive order , Mr. Stoltz said , `` and the way in which the various committees have over time interpreted it , has led in my view to a proper caution on the part of operators , including me . '' 
In other words , Congress wo n't let the CIA do much of anything anymore , and that 's fine with the CIA . 
The pay 's the same , and the duty 's lighter . 
And of course , doing anything that might be second-guessed by Congress carries heavy penalties . 
Witness the Walsh prosecution of Ollie North . 
The Intelligence Committee 's ranking Republican , Senator William Cohen , joined with Senator George Mitchell to write a best seller about Iran-Contra , deploring `` Men of Zeal . '' 
No doubt many people in the CIA , the Pentagon and the National Security Council have read it . 
What kind of initiative should anyone expect from people out on the line who 've read all this and know what can happen if they fail ? 
Who wants to end up as the protagonist in a Bill Cohen morality play ? 
The order against assassinations is another artifact of the same congressional mind-set , a product of the 1970s Vietnam syndrome against any executive action . 
President Bush would do himself and the country a favor by rescinding the order as an ambiguous intrusion on his ability to defend America 's national security . 
There are of course good reasons the U.S. should n't get into the assassination business , but rescinding the executive order is not the same thing as saying the U.S. should start passing out exploding cigars . 
The world being the nasty place it is , we want Presidents to have the freedom to order operations in which someone might get killed . 
In such situations , you can not write rules in advance , you can only make sure the President takes the responsibility . 
The executive order and the reported agreements with the Intelligence Committee are neither sensible nor moral . 
As it now stands , the U.S. can bomb Tripoli , but ca n't `` assassinate '' Colonel Gadhafi . 
It can send a fighter squadron to strafe terrorist hideouts in the Bekaa Valley , but ca n't shoot Abu Nidal . 
Both the assassination order and the quality of debate in Washington are telling the world that the only way the U.S. will kill a madman is by making sure we take some innocent civilians with him . 
We 've heard California 's property-tax-cutting Proposition 13 blamed for a lot over the years , but ABC 's Ted Koppel came up with a new wrinkle in his earthquake coverage last week when he asked Democratic Assemblyman Richard Katz if Prop. 13 had withheld money needed for road maintenance . 
Mr. Katz happily agreed , sliding over the fact that California 's roads and bridges are n't funded by property taxes but by state and federal gasoline taxes . 
Both have been raised at least 30 % in recent years , even while the price of gasoline has fallen . 
Dragging Prop. 13 into this story is a pretty long stretch . 
A series of explosions tore through the huge Phillips Petroleum Co. plastics plant near here , injuring more than a hundred and closing parts of the Houston Ship Channel . 
There were no immediate reports of deaths , but officials said a number of workers were still unaccounted for last night . 
The Bartlesville , Okla. , oil company late yesterday still had n't said officially what caused the explosions and fires , which sent columns of heavy black smoke billowing high into the air . 
One local Phillips manager said a seal blew in one of the plant 's reactors . 
Glenn Cox , Phillips ' president and chief operating officer , and other Phillips officials flew from Bartlesville to assess the damage and determine the cause of the afternoon explosions . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Phillips Petroleum shares fell $ 1.125 to $ 23.125 . 
The plastics plant is located on an 800-acre tract in the heart of the petrochemical corridor that reaches along the U.S. Gulf Coast . 
The U.S. Coast Guard closed six miles of the Houston Ship Channel , where about 150 companies have operations , because the thick , black smoke obscured the area . 
The Port of Houston closed its terminal for handling bulk cargo . 
Broken water lines and gas leaks hindered firefighters ' efforts , but by late yesterday authorities said they had the fire under control . 
The blasts blew out windows , spewed debris for miles and crumpled the ceiling in an area elementary school . 
The initial fireball was caught by cameras in downtown Houston , about 10 miles away . 
Nearby Pasadena , Texas , police reported that 104 people had been taken to area hospitals , but a spokeswoman said that toll could rise . 
The injured , including three in critical condition , were treated for burns , breathing problems and cuts from flying glass , hospital officials said . 
The plant employs between 800 and 900 on three shifts . 
The number working at the time of the blast was n't known . 
Yesterday 's explosions were the second round in two months at the plastics plant . 
In late August , four contract workers were injured and one Phillips employee died after an explosion at a fuel supply line near the facility 's boiler house . 
The Phillips facility manufactures polyethylene , polypropylene and K-resin , plastics used in a wide array of applications , including milk jugs and toys . 
Plastics are the cornerstone of Phillips ' chemicals operations , which is the biggest single contributor to the company 's profits . 
A federal judge in Manhattan has entered a judgment requiring a Chicago organized crime figure to pay the government $ 250,000 , representing alleged profits he gained from his involvement with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters . 
Manhattan U.S. Attorney Otto Obermaier said it was the first time ever that the government had obtained any disgorgement from an organized crime figure indicted under the civil racketeering law . 
Joseph Lombardo , who the government alleged was the `` captain '' of organized crime in Chicago , was one of numerous defendants in the government 's sweeping racketeering suit against the Teamsters . 
In the suit , filed in June 1988 , the government accused the union 's leadership of depriving its 1.6 million members of their rights through a pattern of racketeering . 
Among other things , the government claimed that organized crime figures had routinely handpicked the union 's top officials . 
U.S. District Judge David Edelstein also permanently enjoined Mr. Lombardo from any future dealings with the Teamsters or any other labor union . 
Mr. Lombardo , the last of the defendants to settle the suit , agreed to pay the government the $ 250,000 within one week . 
Exxon Corp. said its third-quarter earnings slipped 9 % as profits from two of its three major businesses sagged . 
All cleanup costs from last spring 's Alaskan oil spill were reflected in earlier results , it said . 
Phillips Petroleum Co. and Atlantic Richfield Co. also reported declines in quarterly profit , while Ashland Oil Inc. posted a loss for the latest quarter . 
Amerada Hess Corp. and Occidental Petroleum Corp. reported higher earnings . 
Exxon 
Although Exxon spent heavily during the latest quarter to clean up the Alaskan shoreline blackened by its huge oil spill , those expenses as well as the cost of a continuing spill-related program are covered by $ 880 million in charges taken during the first half . 
An Exxon official said that at this time the oil company does n't anticipate any additional charges to future earnings relating to the cleanup of oil spilled when one of its tankers rammed into an underwater reef . 
She added , however , that charges already taken do n't take into account the potential effect of litigation involving the oil spill . 
She said that impact ca n't be reasonably assessed yet . 
Exxon 's net income during the third quarter dropped to $ 1.11 billion , or 87 cents a share , from $ 1.22 billion , or 93 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue rose 8.1 % , to $ 23.65 billion from $ 21.88 billion . 
During the third quarter , Exxon purchased 8.34 million shares of its stock at a cost of $ 373 million . 
Exxon 's profitability , like that of many other oil companies , was hurt during the third quarter by declining returns from the chemicals and refining and marketing businesses . 
Exxon 's earnings from chemicals operations fell $ 90 million , to $ 254 million , while refining and marketing profits declined $ 180 million , to $ 357 million . 
Although crude oil prices were significantly higher this year , they were n't strong enough to offset the declining profits in those business sectors at most oil companies , said William Randol , oil analyst for First Boston Corp . 
He estimates that the price of West Texas Intermediate , the U.S. benchmark crude , was $ 4.04 a barrel higher during the third quarter of this year than in the same period last year . 
Ashland Oil 
A rash of one-time charges left Ashland Oil with a loss of $ 39 million for its fiscal fourth quarter . 
A year earlier , the refiner earned $ 66 million , or $ 1.19 a share . 
Quarterly revenue rose 4.5 % , to $ 2.3 billion from $ 2.2 billion . 
For the year , net income tumbled 61 % to $ 86 million , or $ 1.55 a share . 
The Ashland , Ky. , oil company reported a $ 38 million charge resulting from settlement of a 10-year dispute with the National Iranian Oil Co. over claims that Ashland did n't pay for Iranian crude it had received . 
In September , Ashland settled the long-simmering dispute by agreeing to pay Iran $ 325 million . 
Ashland also took a $ 25 million after-tax charge to cover anticipated costs to correct problems with boilers built by one of its subsidiaries . 
The oil refiner also booked a $ 15 million charge for selling Ashland Technology Corp. , one of its subsidiaries , at a loss . 
Amerada Hess 
Third-quarter earnings at Amerada Hess more than tripled to $ 51.81 million , or 64 cents a share , from $ 15.7 million , or 20 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue climbed 28 % , to $ 1.18 billion from $ 925 million . 
Profits improved across Hess 's businesses . 
Refining and marketing earnings climbed to $ 33.3 million from $ 12.9 million , and exploration and production earnings rose to $ 37.1 million from $ 17.9 million . 
Hess 's earnings were up despite a $ 30 million charge to cover the cost of maintaining operations after Hurricane Hugo heavily damaged the company 's refinery at St. Croix . 
It is widely known within industry circles that Hess had to buy oil products in the high-priced spot markets to continue supplying its customers . 
Hess declined to comment . 
Phillips Petroleum 
Phillips Petroleum 's third-quarter earnings slid 60 % , to $ 87 million , or 36 cents a share , from $ 215 million , or 89 cents a share . 
Revenue rose 6.9 % , to $ 3.1 billion from $ 2.9 billion . 
Shrinking profit margins in chemical and refining and marketing sectors accounted for most of the decline , said Chairman C.J. Silas in a statement . 
Despite higher oil prices , exploration and production profits were off because of foreign-currency losses and some construction costs incurred in one of Phillips ' North Sea oil fields . 
A year ago , results were buoyed by a $ 20 million after-tax gain from an asset sale . 
Occidental Petroleum 
Occidental Petroleum 's third-quarter net income rose 2.9 % to $ 108 million , or 39 cents a share , from $ 105 million , or 38 cents a share , a year earlier . 
The latest quarter included an after-tax gain of $ 71 million from non-recurring items . 
Sales dropped 2 % , to $ 4.8 billion from $ 4.9 billion . 
The latest period included a $ 54 million gain from the sale of various oil and gas properties , a $ 22 million charge from the restructuring of Occidental 's domestic oil and gas operations , and tax credits of $ 42 million . 
Both periods included non-recurring charges of $ 3 million for early retirement of debt . 
Occidental said oil and gas earnings fell to $ 17 million from $ 20 million . 
The latest period includes net gains of $ 32 million in non-recurring credits from the sale of properties , indicating operating losses for the quarter in the oil and gas division . 
Chemical earnings fell 10 % , reflecting softening of demand . 
Atlantic Richfield 
Citing its reduced ownership in the Lyondell Petrochemical Co. , Atlantic Richfield reported that net income slid 3.1 % in the third quarter to $ 379 million , or $ 2.19 a share , from $ 391 million , or $ 2.17 a share , for the comparable period last year . 
Sales fell 20 % , to $ 3.7 billion from $ 4.6 billion . 
Arco 's earnings from its 49.9 % stake in Lyondell fell to $ 37 million from $ 156 million for the same period last year , when Lyondell was wholly owned . 
Offsetting the lower stake in Lyondell were higher crude oil prices , increased natural gas volumes and higher coke prices , the company said . 
Coal earnings rose to $ 26 million from $ 21 million . 
For the nine months , Arco reported net income of $ 1.6 billion , or $ 8.87 a share , up 33 % from $ 1.2 billion , or $ 6.56 a share a year earlier . 
Sales were $ 12 billion , off 13 % from $ 13.8 billion . 
Jeff Rowe contributed to this article . 
The following were among yesterday 's offerings and pricings in the U.S. and non-U.S. capital markets , with terms and syndicate manager , as compiled by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report : 
Imo Industries Inc. -- $ 150 million of senior subordinated debentures due 2001 , priced at par to yield 12 % . 
The issue will be sold through Morgan Stanley & Co . 
Other details were n't available . 
San Antonio , Texas -- $ 575 million of electric and gas system revenue refunding bonds , Series 1989 , 1989A and 1989B , tentatively priced by a First Boston Corp. group to yield from 6.15 % in 1991 to 7.30 % in 2009 . 
The issue includes current interest bonds due 1991-2000 , 2009 , 2012 , 2014 and 2016 , and capital appreciation bonds due 2001-2005 . 
The current interest serial bonds are priced to yield from 6.15 % in 1991 to 7.10 % in 2000 . 
There are about $ 100 million of 7 % term bonds due 2009 , priced to yield 7.30 % , which is the issue 's high yield . 
There are also about $ 124 million of 6 1\/2 % bonds priced to yield 7.25 % in 2012 ; about $ 97 million of 6 % bonds priced to yield 7.20 % in 2014 ; and about $ 26.5 million of 5 % bonds priced to yield 7.15 % in 2016 . 
All of the term bonds are original issue discount bonds , according to the lead underwriter . 
The capital appreciation bonds are tentatively priced to yield to maturity from 7 % in 2001 to 7.10 % in 2003-2005 . 
The bonds are rated double-A by Moody 's Investors Service Inc. and Standard & Poor 's Corp . 
Maryland Stadium Authority -- $ 137.6 million of sports facilities lease revenue bonds , Series 1989 D , due 1992-1999 , 2004 , 2009 and 2019 , tentatively priced at par by a Morgan Stanley group to yield from 6.35 % in 1992 to 7.60 % in 2019 . 
Serial bonds are priced to yield to 7.10 % in 1999 . 
There are $ 15,845,000 of 7 3\/8 % bonds priced at par and due 2004 ; $ 22,985,000 of 7 1\/2 % bonds priced at par and due 2009 ; and $ 82.6 million of 7.60 % bonds priced at par and due 2019 . 
The bonds are rated double-A by Moody 's and double-A-minus by S&P . 
Interest on the bonds will be treated as a preference item in calculating the federal alternative minimum tax that may be imposed on certain investors . 
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. -- $ 250 million of Remic mortgage securities being offered in 11 classes by Morgan Stanley . 
The offering , Series 107 , is backed by Freddie Mac 15-year , 9 % securities , and brings Freddie Mac 's 1989 Remic issuance to $ 32.8 billion and its total volume to $ 46.8 billion since the program began in February 1988 . 
The offering used at-market pricing . 
Federal National Mortgage Association -- $ 500 million of Remic mortgage securities being offered in 10 classes by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets . 
The offering , Series 1989-85 , is backed by Fannie Mae 9 % securities . 
Separately , a $ 400 million issue of Fannie Mae Remic mortgage securities is being offered in 15 classes by Bear , Stearns & Co . 
The offering , Series 1989-86 , is backed by Fannie Mae 9 % securities . 
Finally , a $ 300 million issue of Fannie Mae Remic mortgage securities is being offered in 12 classes by Smith Barney , Harris Upham & Co . 
The offering , Series 1989-87 , is backed by Fannie Mae 9 1\/2 % securities . 
The three offerings together bring Fannie Mae 's 1989 Remic issuance to $ 32.4 billion and its total Remic volume to $ 44.5 billion since the program began in April 1987 . 
Credit Agricole ( CNCA ) ( French ) -- $ 250 million of 8 3\/4 % bonds due Nov. 21 , 1994 , priced at 101.80 to yield 8.77 % annually less full fees , via IBJ International Ltd . 
Fees 1 7\/8 . 
Hokuriku Electric Power Co . ( Japan ) -- $ 200 million of 8 7\/8 % bonds due Nov. 20 , 1996 , priced at 101 3\/4 to yield 8.90 % less full fees , via Yamaichi International ( Europe ) Ltd . 
Fees 1 7\/8 . 
International Finance Corp . ( agency ) -- 10 billion pesetas of 11.6 % bonds due Nov. 30 , 1994 , priced at 101 5\/8 to yield 11.60 % less full fees , via Citibank ( Madrid ) and Banco Espanol de Credito , Spain . 
Fees 1 5\/8 . 
Royal Bank of Canada , Grand Cayman branch ( Canada ) -- 100 million Canadian dollars of 10 3\/4 % deposit notes due Nov. 30 , 1994 , priced at 101 3\/4 to yield 10.78 % less full fees , via RBC Dominion Securities International Ltd . 
Fees 1 7\/8 . 
Union Bank of Finland -- 100 million Australian dollars of 9 % bonds due Nov. 9 , 1990 , priced at 94 to yield 17.20 % less full fees , via Banque Paribas Capital Markets Ltd . 
Fees 1 . 
Ford Motor Credit -- $ 2.57 billion of certificates backed by automobile loans with a coupon rate of 8.70 % , priced at 99 19\/32 to yield 8.903 % through an underwriting group headed by First Boston Corp . 
The issue is the first by Ford Motor Credit , a unit of Ford Motor Co. , and the second largest in the four-year history of the $ 45 billion asset-backed market . 
The largest issue was a $ 4 billion offering of auto-loan securities by General Motors Acceptance Corp. in 1986 . 
The Ford issue , through Ford Credit 1989-A Grantor Trust , was priced at a yield spread of 95 basis points above the Treasury 7 3\/4 % issue due July 1991 . 
The offering is rated doubleA-2 by Moody 's and double-A by S&P , based on the quality of the underlying auto loans and a guarantee covering 9 % of the deal from Ford Motor Credit . 
The certificates have an estimated average life of 1.8 years , assuming monthly prepayments at 1.3 % of the original balance . 
The final maturity is in five years . 
The Mouth is back . 
Morton Downey Jr. , who self-destructed as a talk-show host and frequently verbally abused his guests , has been signed to co-host a half-hour nightly program on the Consumer News and Business Channel , the cable channel partly owned by the General Electric Co. 's National Broadcasting Co . 
The premiere of `` Showdown , '' with Mr. Downey and Richard G. Carter , a columnist with the New York Daily News , is scheduled for Dec. 4 at 8 p.m . 
CNBC is available to 13 million cable households . 
Mr. Downey said he is not going to change his style , which some critics said was flamboyant and others deemed offensive . 
`` But I 'm going to proceed in a more logical way . 
I 'm not going to do anything that is not acceptable in anyone 's home . 
But that does n't mean I 'm not going to get angry . '' 
Michael Eskridge , president of CNBC , said that although there will be a studio audience , viewers will no longer have to endure the shouting of `` Mort ! Mort ! Mort ! '' 
But just how does Mr. Downey 's unorthodox style mesh with the sedate tone of CNBC 's business programming ? 
`` Ninety percent of Mort 's old show fits into our style , '' said Mr. Eskridge . 
`` That is consumer issues . '' 
Mr. Downey 's previous show , a one-hour shout fest , syndciated by MCA Inc. and produced by Quantum Media Inc. , was canceled in July after advertisers and stations abandoned it . 
Investors dumped stocks of big companies whose earnings fluctuate with the economy . 
Many of those `` cyclical '' issues are in the Dow Jones Industrial Average , which fell 26.23 to 2662.91 . 
Declining issues on the New York Stock Exchange outpaced advancers , 1,012 to 501 . 
Recession fears are springing up again among investors . 
Analysts say that the selling of cyclical stocks yesterday will be followed by a sell-off in shares of companies with big debt loads on their balance sheets . 
In an economic slowdown , heavy debt loads reduce the flexibility of companies because cash that would normally be used to keep the company buoyant must be diverted to interest payments . 
On the other hand , investors beat a clear path yesterday to blue-chip issues with proven earnings growth records . 
Among the 30 Dow industrials , they bought McDonald 's , Coca-Cola Co. and Procter & Gamble and sold Aluminum Co. of America . 
In another sign of slowdown fears , investors dumped technology shares . 
Many money managers are bracing for a decline in stocks of companies with big debt loads on their balance sheets . 
`` The junk bond market is being taken apart '' because of recession fears , said J. David Mills , senior vice president at Boston Company Advisers . 
`` Under this scrutiny , the first thing you do is sell your cyclical stocks and the second thing you do is sell your over-leveraged companies . '' 
In fact , much of the buying in blue chips yesterday was a pursuit of companies with lower debt levels . 
In a recent investment letter entitled `` Winners of the ` Leverage Wars , ' '' Edward Kerschner , chairman of PaineWebber 's investment policy committee , suggested that investors buy stocks of companies that have avoided loading up on debt . 
`` We 're saying companies have to pay increasing attention to balance sheets , '' said Mr. Kerschner . 
He suggested that investors buy the shares of Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea , J. Baker , McDonald 's , Philip Morris and Sara Lee . 
He said that all of these companies will be able to compete fiercely in an economic downturn . 
McDonald 's has long-term debt equaling 91 % of shareholder equity currently , but Mr. Kerschner said the company is carrying real estate assets at about $ 2.6 billion below their real value . 
Coca-Cola climbed 1 3\/8 to 72 1\/8 ; McDonald 's added 1 to 31 3\/8 , and Procter & Gamble gained 3\/4 to 130 5\/8 . 
A&P fell 1 1\/4 to 57 5\/8 , and J. Baker gained 3\/8 to 21 1\/4 . 
Philip Morris slipped 1\/2 to 43 7\/8 , while Sara Lee closed unchanged at 60 1\/8 . 
According to Salomon Brothers ' `` stub '' stock index of 20 companies whose debt is giant compared with shareholder equity , investors are already beginning to retreat from shares of debt-laden companies . 
From January to early September , the index of stub stocks -- the tiny portion of equity that 's publicly traded following a recapitalization -- outperformed Standard & Poor 's 500-stock index by about 20 % . 
But starting in early September , the index started to slide and now stands about even with the S&P 500 . 
`` Stocks that have a high default risk have started to underperform those stocks that have a lower default risk , '' said Eric Sorenson , director of quantitative analysis at Salomon Brothers . 
`` Companies that have the most exposure to the business cycle have underperformed since late last summer . '' 
Union Carbide , whose third-quarter earnings dropped about 35 % from a year earlier and fell short of analysts ' expectations , declined 1\/2 to 24 1\/2 . 
Also , Exxon went down 3\/8 to 45 3\/4 and Allied-Signal lost 7\/8 to 35 1\/8 even though the companies ' results for the quarter were in line with forecasts . 
Other weak blue-chip issues included Chevron , which went down 2 to 64 7\/8 in Big Board composite trading of 1.3 million shares ; Goodyear Tire & Rubber , off 1 1\/2 to 46 3\/4 , and American Express , down 3\/4 to 37 1\/4 . 
Texas Instruments , which had reported Friday that third-quarter earnings fell more than 30 % from the year-ago level , went down 2 1\/8 to 33 on 1.1 million shares . 
Motorola , another major semiconductor producer , dropped 1 1\/8 to 57 1\/2 . 
Pinnacle West Capital , whose earnings have been hurt by continued problems at its MeraBank unit , fell 1 5\/8 to 9 1\/8 on 2.1 million shares to lead the Big Board 's list of most active issues . 
Growing pressures on the Arizona real-estate market are affecting the thrift ; Pinnacle West told Dow Jones Professional Investor Report it may consider filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection if it ca n't reach an agreement with federal regulators to provide additional capital to MeraBank . 
Hercules dropped 2 5\/8 to 41 3\/4 on one million shares -- about six times its average daily trading volume -- after a disappointing third-quarter earnings report . 
Merrill Lynch and Prudential-Bache Securities both lowered the stock 's investment rating immediately after the results were issued Friday , according to PIR . 
Elsewhere in the chemicals sector , Dow Chemical fell 1 1\/4 to 97 1\/2 , Monsanto lost 1 7\/8 to 118 , B.F. Goodrich slipped 2 1\/4 to 44 3\/4 and Olin slid 1 to 57 3\/4 . 
Other stocks hurt by earnings-related selling included Tandy , which dropped 1 3\/8 to 44 , and Eaton , which retreated 2 1\/2 to 57 1\/2 . 
Third-quarter earnings at both companies were below analysts ' forecasts . 
After declining about 41 % last week , UAL advanced 9 7\/8 to 178 3\/8 on 1.1 million shares on anticipation of a revised takeover offer from a labor-management group for the parent company of United Airlines . 
However , Delta Air Lines fell 1 1\/2 to 67 1\/2 and USAir Group dropped 3\/4 to 42 1\/2 . 
Ramada gained 7\/8 to 11 1\/4 after revamping the terms of its restructuring plan , which calls for the company to sell its hotel operations for $ 540 million and spin off its casino business to shareholders . 
The revision follows last month 's withdrawal of a $ 400 million junk-bond offering for the new casino company , Aztar Corp . 
Mead gained 1 to 37 7\/8 . 
USA Today reported that the Rales brothers , Washington , D.C.-based investors who made an unsuccessful offer to acquire Interco last year , have bought nearly 3 % of Mead 's common shares . 
Entertainment and media stocks generally escaped the market 's slide as well . 
Paramount Communications rose 5\/8 to 58 3\/4 , Time Warner climbed 1 7\/8 to 138 5\/8 , Walt Disney advanced 3 1\/8 to 127 1\/2 , MCA rose 1 1\/8 to 65 5\/8 and McGraw-Hill added 1\/2 to 67 1\/8 . 
The American Stock Exchange Market Value Index lost 3.11 to 379.46 . 
Volume totaled 10,450,000 shares . 
Carnival Cruise Lines Class A fell 1 3\/4 to 20 3\/4 . 
The company said it had been notified unofficially that Waertsilae Marine Industries , a Finnish shipyard building three cruise ships for the company , is having financial trouble and may already have filed for bankruptcy . 
`` Hacksaw '' and `` Bonecrusher '' are the sort of nicknames normally associated with linebackers and heavyweight contenders . 
Who 'd have thought that the next group of tough guys carrying around reputations like that would be school superintendents ? 
Chicago 's new school chief is the hard-nosed Ted Kimbrough . 
At his old job in Compton , Calif. , he took a bitter teachers ' strike and nearly came to blows with a school-board member . 
At his first Chicago press conference , he berated the reporters . 
In New York City , the new Chancellor , Joseph Fernandez , has landed like a 16-inch shell in the middle of a system that has been impervious to serious reform . 
Both men fit the mood of the times -- the mood being one of a public fed up with officials ' rationalizations for why their schools do n't work . 
Former Patterson , N.J. , principal Joe Clark was no doubt the general public 's first experience with this new breed of no-nonsense administrator . 
The subject of the movie `` Lean on Me , '' Mr. Clark controlled his school with a bullhorn and a baseball bat . 
He may have gone overboard in his pursuit of good discipline , but is n't it interesting that some of the country 's biggest , most troubled school districts are choosing new chiefs from the same gravel-chewing mold ? 
Elena Scambio , the woman assigned to run the Jersey City school system that was taken over by the state , says her top priority will be to `` cut through the dead hand of bureaucracy . '' 
Mr. Fernandez does n't take control in New York until January , but already he 's roiling the waters . 
He 's attacked the concept of `` building tenure , '' one of the most disgraceful institutions in American public schools . 
It means it is virtually impossible to fire or even transfer incompetent principals . 
Once they are in the building , they stay . 
One South Bronx principal kept his job for 16 years , despite a serious drinking problem and rarely showing up for work . 
He was finally given leave when he was arrested for allegedly buying crack . 
Naturally , the principals ' union loves building tenure , and tenure has withstood previous challenge . 
We suggest that Mr. Fernandez find an incompetent principal , toss him out of the building and let the forces of the status quo explain to the parents whatever it is they 're defending . 
In his old job , as Dade County chief , Mr. Fernandez forced out 92 teachers and reshuffled 48 principals . 
He cut the dropout rate by 5.5 % . 
But the no-more-nonsense superintendents are going to have to be judicious as well ; incompetent principals and administrators should go , but the good ones ought to be left alone . 
The situation will be especially delicate for Mr. Kimbrough . 
He takes over a school system in the midst of radical reform . 
Chicagoans have just elected 540 neophyte school boards , one for each school . 
This of course led to disaster in New York City . 
Getting a community of parents to care again about its schools is essential , but in Chicago the new boards will make mistakes and Mr. Kimbrough will have to identify them . 
The rise of superintendents such as Joseph Fernandez and Ted Kimbrough suggests plainly the process of disintegration in many school systems . 
The schools ' central mission , educating children , became subsumed by the competing interests of bureaucrats , politicians and unions . 
The classroom itself operated on the periphery of this awful system , discipline collapsed , and kids stopped learning . 
Mr. Chips was a nice fellow , and maybe some day he 'll return . 
Until then , it 's clear that some of the people who 've been keeping big-city schools down are going to be dealing with the Terminator . 
Ingersoll Publications Co. agreed to buy the New Haven Register in a transaction valued at $ 275 million from Goodson Newspaper Group Inc . 
As part of the agreement , Goodson also terminated the contract under which Ingersoll manages Goodson 's 66 newspapers , ending a long association between the two companies that has turned increasingly bitter recently . 
Goodson has accused Ingersoll of paying less attention to its properties and more to such ventures as the recent launch of the St. Louis Sun . 
Under the terms of the accord , Ingersoll will pay about $ 255 million for the Register , a daily that Goodson bought for about $ 170 million in 1986 . 
Goodson will pay the additional $ 20 million in settlement of the management contract . 
Goodson also announced that it hired the former president and senior vice president of Ingersoll to run the Goodson papers . 
Both executives left the company after clashes with Chairman Ralph Ingersoll Jr . 
Goodson , which is based here , will use part of the proceeds to pay down debt associated with its purchase of the Morristown Daily Record for $ 155 million in 1987 . 
The New Jersey paper , like the New Haven , Conn. , paper , was purchased by Ingersoll on Goodson 's behalf as part of the management contract . 
Industry analysts have said that the purchase price for the paper was too high , causing a strain on Goodson 's finances . 
Investment bankers familiar with the company said Goodson is seeking a new bank credit line of $ 190 million and may have to sell additional newspapers . 
David N. Hurwitz , president and chief operating officer of Goodson , said in a telephone interview that the company does n't currently have any plans to sell additional newspapers . 
Goodson said David Carr , former president of Ingersoll Publications , and Ray Cockburn , former senior vice president , would head the new in-house management team at Goodson , which had revenue of $ 225 million in 1988 . 
The association between the two companies stretches back thirty years to a friendship between television producer Mark Goodson and Ingersoll founder Ralph Ingersoll . 
The latter 's son , Ralph Ingersoll Jr. , took over the company and has been managing the Goodson properties and acting as an agent in the purchase of newspapers for Goodson . 
But in recent years , Mr. Ingersoll began focusing more on expanding his own newspaper empire in partnership with investment banking firm Warburg , Pincus & Co . 
Ingersoll has 28 dailies and 200 other non-daily papers in the U.S. and Europe . 
The company said its revenue will exceed $ 750 million this year . 
Ingersoll President Robert M. Jelenic said in a statement that the company is `` delighted by the conclusion of the Goodson relationship '' and will be able to `` concentrate all our energies '' on Ingersoll 's own papers . 
Mr. Goodson , in his own statement , was less upbeat , saying `` unfortunately over the past few years , it has become increasingly clear that Ralph and I have different agendas , '' and that he feels `` more comfortable with a management team whose sole interest and responsibility is in the Goodson papers . 
Just five months after Ogilvy Group was swallowed up in an unsolicited takeover , Kenneth Roman , Ogilvy 's chairman and chief executive officer , said he is leaving to take a top post at American Express Co . 
Mr. Roman , 59 years old , abruptly announced he will leave the venerable ad agency , whose largest client is American Express , to become American Express 's executive vice president for corporate affairs and communications . 
He will succeed Harry L. Freeman , 57 , who has said he will retire in December . 
Mr. Freeman said in August that he would retire by the end of this year to take `` executive responsibility '' for an embarrassing effort to discredit banker Edmond Safra . 
American Express representatives apparently influenced the publication of unfavorable articles about Mr. Safra . 
The company later apologized and agreed to make $ 8 million in contributions to charities chosen by him . 
Although Mr. Freeman is retiring , he will continue to work as a consultant for American Express on a project basis . 
Ad industry executives were n't surprised by Mr. Roman 's decision to leave Ogilvy . 
The agency , under his direction , bitterly fought a takeover attempt by WPP Group PLC of London before succumbing in May . 
And although Mr. Roman and WPP 's chief executive , Martin Sorrell , have gone out of their way to be publicly supportive of each other , people close to Mr. Roman say he was unhappy giving up control of the company . 
Some executives also cite tension because of efforts by Mr. Sorrell , a financial man , to cut costs at the agency . 
Mr. Roman will be succeeded as the head of Ogilvy 's flagship ad agency , Ogilvy & Mather Worldwide , by Graham Phillips , 50 , who had been president of North American operations and who , like Mr. Sorrell , is British . 
Alexander Brody , 56 , will take on the newly created position of president of the world-wide agency and chief executive of its international operations . 
He had been president of the international operations . 
Mr. Roman also had overseen Ogilvy Group 's two other units , the Scali McCabe Sloves advertising agency and its research division , but those units will now report directly to WPP . 
Mr. Roman appears custom-made for the American Express job . 
Known as a traditional executive , he is very much in the conservative American Express mold . 
Moreover , after 26 years at Ogilvy he had honed a reputation for being squeaky-clean and a straight arrow -- which can only help American Express in the wake of the Safra incident . 
He also is close to American Express 's chairman and chief executive officer , James D. Robinson III . 
Aside from working with Mr. Robinson on the American Express advertising account for about 11 years , Mr. Roman serves on several of the same charities and boards as Mr. Robinson . 
The abrupt management change sparked widespread speculation that Mr. Roman had been pushed out of Ogilvy 's top spot by Mr. Sorrell . 
But Mr. Roman flatly denied the speculation , saying Mr. Sorrell had tried several times to persuade him to stay , offering various incentives and in one instance sending a note with a case of wine ( The wine , naturally , was Seagram 's brand , an Ogilvy client ) . 
`` He asked me not to resign . 
The implication that I was pushed aside would n't be accurate , '' Mr. Roman said . 
Mr. Sorrell , traveling in the Far East , could n't be reached . 
Mr. Roman said American Express 's Mr. Robinson first approached him about the job in late September . 
According to industry executives , Peter Sutherland , a former European Community commissioner from Ireland , was also a serious contender for the American Express job . 
Although it ultimately was n't offered to him , he will be on retainer to American Express as an adviser on international matters . 
After talking on and off for the past four weeks , Mr. Roman said , he agreed to take the job because `` it 's the right time , it 's a terrific opportunity , and I think I leave the company in very strong hands . 
It was my decision , not anyone else 's . '' 
Mr. Roman also brushed aside reports about infighting between him and Mr. Phillips , his successor at Ogilvy . 
The two executives could hardly be more different . 
Mr. Roman comes across as a low-key executive ; Mr. Phillips has a flashier personality . 
During time off , Mr. Roman tends to his garden ; Mr. Phillips confesses to a fondness for , among other things , fast cars and planes . 
Industry executives say that although the two executives used to clash more frequently , the WPP takeover brought them closer together . 
`` I 'm the guy who made him head of New York , head of the U.S. , president of North America , and recommended him { to Mr. Sorrell } as my successor . 
Would I have done all those things successively if I did n't think he was the right guy ? '' Mr. Roman asked . 
He labeled reports of friction `` ridiculous , '' and said that he spent part of the weekend on Mr. Phillips 's boat in Connecticut . 
Mr. Roman will oversee American Express 's public relations and government affairs , among other things , but he wo n't be involved in its advertising , which is handled by the operating units . 
`` I consider this a second career , '' he said . 
He also will sit on the company 's corporate planning and policy committee , made up of the top corporate and operating executives . 
Mr. Roman 's departure is n't expected to have any enormous repercussions at Ogilvy . 
American Express , Kraft General Foods , and Mattel executives said the move wo n't affect their relationships with the ad agency . 
`` General Foods 's relationships with its agencies are based on the agencies ' work , and will continue to be , '' said David Hurwitt , a vice president of Kraft General Foods . 
But some clients and analysts expressed concern that Mr. Phillips is n't as well-known to many clients . 
`` Ken was my key contact , '' said J. Nicholas Hahn , president and chief executive officer of Cotton Inc. , which represents cotton producers . 
`` I do n't know { Mr. Phillips } all that well . 
I have n't seen or talked to him in several years . '' 
And some analysts questioned whether Mr. Phillips would have the skills Ogilvy needs to turn the agency around . 
While the agency has done well in many parts of the world , its flagship New York office has had a dismal track record recently ; it has won few new accounts while losing big ones , including Maxwell House . 
`` I think { Mr. Phillips } is going to need some help . 
I think they need creative leadership , and I do n't think they have it , '' said Emma Hill , an analyst with Wertheim & Co . 
Ogilvy & Mather 's top creative executive , Norman Berry , left the agency earlier this year . 
`` Norm Berry was a creative inspiration at the company , and nobody has filled that void , '' said Ms. Hill . 
But other analysts said that having Mr. Phillips succeed Mr. Roman would make for a smooth transition . 
`` Graham Phillips has been there a long time , knows the culture well , is aggressive , and apparently gets along well with '' Mr. Sorrell , said Andrew Wallach , an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert . 
`` It 's probably a reasonable transition . 
Hopefully , he 'll be the answer to the problems they 've had in New York . '' 
Sale of Saatchi Unit Close 
Computer Sciences Corp. , El Segundo , Calif. , said it is close to making final an agreement to buy Cleveland Consulting Associates from Saatchi & Saatchi 
Computer Sciences would n't disclose the proposed purchase price for Cleveland Consulting , which counsels companies on logistics and supply . 
But David Lord , managing editor of Consultants News , an industry publication based in Fitzwilliam , N.H. , said an industry standard would suggest a purchase price of between one and two times Cleveland Consulting 's approximately $ 15 million annual revenue . 
Both Saatchi & Saatchi , which announced its intention to sell off most of its consulting business in June , and Cleveland Consulting declined to comment on the proposed sale . 
Ad Notes ... . 
NEW ACCOUNT : 
AmBase Corp. , New York , awarded the ad account for its Home Insurance Co. unit to Biederman , Kelly & Shaffer , New York . 
Billings were n't disclosed ... . 
Puerto Rico Telephone Co. awarded its $ 3 million account to West Indies & Grey , Grey Advertising 's office in Puerto Rico . 
DIET COKE : 
Coca-Cola Co. yesterday said singer Elton John signed to appear in an ad for Diet Coke . 
Details of the commercial , which will be part of the brand 's 1990 advertising campaign , were n't disclosed . 
Mr. John becomes the latest of many music stars , including George Michael and Whitney Houston , to appear in ads for the diet drink . 
Turner Broadcasting System Inc. said it formed a unit to make and distribute movies to theaters overseas and , eventually , to U.S. theaters , too . 
The operator of cable-television networks said the new Turner Pictures unit will produce movies that will premiere on Turner Broadcasting 's Turner Network Television channel , or TNT , and then will be released internationally in movie theaters . 
The unit 's first two offerings are slated to be `` The Secret Life of Ian Fleming , '' a dramatization about the former British spy who wrote the James Bond novels , and `` Treasure Island , '' produced by Charlton Heston , who also stars in the movie . 
Ted Turner , Turner Broadcasting 's chairman , was named chairman of Turner Pictures , and Gerry Hogan , president of Turner Entertainment Networks , was named president of the unit . 
In an interview , Mr. Hogan said the subsidiary 's primary mission will be to make movies for TNT and to distribute them internationally . 
But he said Turner Broadcasting already has found some ideas that might work well as films for theatrical release in the U.S. . 
`` When that occurs , and when the time is right , we 'll release the films in the U.S. , '' he said , adding that Turner Pictures may develop such movies next year for domestic release in 1991 . 
Turner has made several movies , docudramas and documentaries for its networks in recent years , but the company has never acted as a full-fledged movie studio and released its own pictures to theaters . 
Mr. Hogan said `` The Secret Life of Ian Fleming '' and `` Treasure Island '' cost more than $ 6 million each to make , which is only about one-third the cost of most movies made for theatrical release . 
The Turner move is in line with a cable-TV trend toward more original programming -- and toward finding more ways to amortize the high cost of producing films . 
In July , Viacom Inc. formed Viacom Pictures to produce 12 low-budget movies a year that will premiere on Showtime network and be distributed later in various markets , including foreign theaters . 
In a sign the stock slump has n't quieted Europe 's takeover fever , Cie . Financiere de Paribas said it intends to bid for one of France 's other large financial and industrial holding companies , Cie. de Navigation Mixte . 
Paribas said that once it receives the go-ahead from French stock market authorities , it will offer to boost its Navigation Mixte stake to 66.7 % from the current 18.7 % . 
Its cash-or-shares bid values Navigation Mixte at about 22.82 billion francs ( $ 3.62 billion ) , making this one of France 's largest-ever attempted takeovers . 
The cost of buying the additional 48 % stake would be 10.95 billion francs ( $ 1.74 billion ) . 
The move would greatly boost Paribas 's stake in the insurance , transport and food businesses , where Navigation Mixte is strong . 
It also would make Paribas a major French ally of West Germany 's Allianz AG insurance group . 
Allianz holds a 50 % stake in Navigation Mixte 's insurance interests , acquired three weeks ago . 
Those include Rhin et Moselle Vie and Via Assurances . 
Long considered a potential takeover target , Navigation Mixte had hoped Allianz would help protect it from raiders . 
That idea may have backfired . 
Paribas is Allianz 's main French bank , and the Munich-based group said it intends to stay neutral . 
Navigation Mixte said it would n't have any comment until its board meets Wednesday . 
But Navigation Mixte is loosely held and hard to defend . 
`` The defensive options are limited , '' says Philippe Braye , a partner in portfolio management concern France Finance Quatre . 
`` Who would bid against Paribas ? '' 
If the Paribas bid succeeds , it will be the second time in two months a big French investment banking group has snapped up an insurance group . 
Last month , Paribas 's archrival , Cie . Financiere de Suez , won a battle for Groupe Victoire , France 's second-largest private-sector insurer , which itself had just acquired West Germany 's Colonia Versicherung AG . 
That complex bid was billed as France 's largest takeover ever ( this one is slightly smaller ) . 
Moreover , Suez had just finished winning an even larger battle last year for control of Societe Generale de Belgique . 
Paribas officials , once considered France 's toughest bankers , felt abashed at Suez 's success and its rapid growth . 
Although Paribas denies it , analysts say the new bid in part simply reflects the continuing rivalry between France 's two largest investment banking groups . 
It also reflects the broader pressure on companies in Europe to keep up as the European Community prepares to reduce internal trade barriers by 1992 . 
Although Paribas Chairman Michel Francois-Poncet would n't rule out eventually selling all of Navigation Mixte 's insurance operations to Allianz , he stressed the potential for the two groups instead to cooperate . 
He also told reporters the acquisition would give Paribas fresh diversity , bringing it properties in food and transport where it has been weak . 
Navigation Mixte has investments in a sugar company , a food and canning concern , a bakery and bus and trucking firms , among others . 
And Navigation Mixte has a huge hidden attraction . 
Payment by Allianz for the insurance interests it has just bought will help swell the French concern 's treasury to an estimated 11 billion francs . 
Paribas said it will bid 1,850 francs a share for Navigation Mixte shares that qualify for a full yearly dividend , and 1,800 francs for those created July 1 , which are eligible for partial dividends . 
Alternatively , it said it would offer three Paribas shares , themselves eligible for dividends as of next Jan. 1 , for one Navigation Mixte share . 
Paribas shares closed down 30 francs at 610 francs , and Navigation Mixte shares were suspended at 1,800 francs pending the outcome of the bid . 
Paribas said it would publish details of its bid once authorities clear it . 
This is one of the first bids under new takeover rules aimed at encouraging open bids instead of gradual accumulation of large stakes . 
Some financial sources said privately that Paribas blundered in failing to move sooner for the insurance and industrial group , bidding only after speculation had pushed up the price . 
Mr. Francois-Poncet responded that his group initially intended to take only a minority stake , striking an alliance with current management . 
When notoriously independent-minded Navigation Mixte Chairman Marc Fournier rejected Paribas 's offer and began buying Paribas shares in retaliation , Mr. Francois-Poncet said , he felt obliged to bid for control . 
He told reporters he had information that Mr. Fournier was preparing to buy as much as 20 % of Paribas , up from less than 5 % currently . 
A bid against Paribas could n't be ruled out . 
France 's second-largest government-owned insurance company , Assurances Generales de France , has been building its own Navigation Mixte stake , currently thought to be between 8 % and 10 % . 
Analysts said they do n't think it is contemplating a takeover , however , and its officials could n't be reached . 
Crude oil futures prices fell further as analysts and traders said OPEC oil producers are n't putting the brakes on output ahead of the traditionally weak first quarter . 
In trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange , the U.S. benchmark West Texas Intermediate crude fell 39 cents a barrel to $ 19.76 for December delivery . 
Petroleum products prices also declined . 
Analysts pointed to reports that the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is producing substantially more than its official limit of 20.5 million barrels a day , with some accounts putting the 13-nation group 's output as high as 23 million barrels a day . 
That level of production did n't take its toll on futures prices for the fourth quarter , when demand is traditionally strong . 
But because first-quarter demand is normally the weakest of the year , several market participants say , OPEC production will have to decline to keep prices from eroding further . 
The group plans to meet in a month to discuss production strategy for early 1990 . 
With prices already headed lower , news of a series of explosions at a major Phillips Petroleum Co. chemical facility on the Houston Ship Channel also was bearish for prices . 
Even though such facilities use a relatively small amount of crude , analysts say , now the facility wo n't need any , at a time of already high availability . 
The Phillips plant makes polyethylene , polypropylene and other plastic products . 
A company official said the explosions began when a seal blew out . 
Dozens of workers were injured , authorities said . 
There was no immediate estimate of damage from the company . 
Some petroleum futures traders say technical considerations now will help to put downward pressure on futures prices . 
For instance , one trader said that prices inevitably will go lower now that they 've fallen below $ 20 a barrel . 
`` Our technician is a little bearish now that we 've taken out $ 20 , '' he said . 
In other commodity markets yesterday : 
COPPER : 
The selling that started on Friday continued yesterday . 
The December contract fell 3.85 cents a pound to $ 1.1960 . 
London Metal Exchange warehouse stocks were down only 4,800 metric tons for the week to 84,500 tons ; expectations late last week were a drop of 10,000 to 15,000 tons . 
The New York market made its high for the day on the opening and when it dropped below the $ 1.23-a-pound level , selling picked up as previous buyers bailed out of their positions and aggressive short sellers -- anticipating further declines -- moved in . 
Fund selling also picked up at that point . 
According to Bernard Savaiko , senior commodity analyst at PaineWebber , the only stability to the market came when short sellers periodically moved in to cover their positions by buying contracts . 
This activity produced small rallies , which in turn attracted new short selling . 
Mr. Savaiko noted that copper had a steep fall in spite of a weak dollar , which would normally support the U.S. copper market . 
Such support usually comes from arbitragers who use a strong British pound to buy copper in New York . 
`` The sell-off would probably have been worse if the dollar had been strong , '' he said . 
Copper has been stuck in a trading range of $ 1.19 to $ 1.34 . 
Mr. Savaiko believes that if copper falls below the bottom of this range the next significant support level will be about $ 1.04 . 
PRECIOUS METALS : 
Platinum and palladium struggled to maintain their prices all day despite news stories over the weekend that recent cold fusion experiments , which use both metals , showed signs of producing extra heat . 
January platinum closed down $ 2.80 an ounce at $ 486.30 , nearly $ 4 above its low for the day . 
December palladium was off $ 1.55 an ounce at $ 137.20 . 
Platinum is believed to have good support around $ 480 and palladium at around $ 130 . 
Some traders were thought to be waiting for the auto sales report , which will be released today . 
Such sales are watched closely by platinum and palladium traders because both metals are used in automobile catalytic converters . 
Mr. Savaiko theorized that the news on cold fusion did n't affect the market yesterday because many traders have already been badly burnt by such stories . 
He said the traders are demanding a higher level of proof before they will buy palladium again . 
Also weighing on both metals ' prices is the role of the chief supplier , the Soviet Union . 
Many analysts believe that the Soviets ' thirst for dollars this year to buy grain and other Western commodities and goods will bring them to the market whenever prices rally very much . 
GRAINS AND SOYBEANS : 
Prices closed mixed as contracts reacted to largely offsetting bullish and bearish news . 
On the Chicago Board of Trade , soybeans for November delivery closed at $ 5.63 a bushel , down half a cent , while the December wheat contract rose three-quarters of a cent to $ 4.0775 a bushel . 
Supporting prices was the announcement late Friday of additional grain sales to the Soviet Union . 
But acting as a drag on prices was the improved harvest weather over the weekend and the prospect for continued fair weather this week over much of the Farm Belt . 
Strong farmer selling over the weekend also weighed on prices . 
SUGAR : 
World prices tumbled , mostly from their own weight , according to analysts . 
The March contract ended at 13.79 cents a pound , down 0.37 cent . 
For the past week or so , traders have been expecting India to buy between 150,000 and 200,000 tons of refined sugar , and there have been expectations of a major purchase by Japan . 
But with no reports of either country actually entering the market , analysts said , futures prices became vulnerable . 
Developing countries such as India , some analysts said , seem to have made it a point to stay away whenever sugar reached the top of its trading range , around 14.75 cents , and wait for prices to return to the bottom of the range , around 13.50 cents . 
But Erik Dunlaevy , a sugar analyst with Balfour Maclaine International Ltd. , said the explanation for the latest drop in sugar prices is much simpler : Speculators , he said , `` got too long too soon and ran into resistance around the old contract highs . '' 
A PaineWebber analyst said that in light of a new estimate of a production increase of four million metric tons and only a modest increase in consumption , sugar is n't likely to rise above the top of its trading range without a crop problem in a major producing country . 
COCOA : 
Futures rallied modestly . 
The December contract rose $ 33 a metric ton to $ 1,027 , near its high for the day . 
Gill & Duffus Ltd. , a British cocoa-trading house , estimated that the 1989-90 world cocoa surplus would be 231,000 tons , down from 314,000 tons for the previous year . 
Market technicians were encouraged by the price patterns , which in the past have preceded sharp rallies . 
Recent prices for cocoa have been near levels last seen in the mid-1970s . 
At such prices , according to Mr. Savaiko , bargain hunting and short-covering -- buying back of contracts previously sold -- by speculators is n't uncommon . 
But Mr. Savaiko expects stepped-up producer selling at around the $ 1,040 to $ 1,050 level . 
He also noted that a strong sterling market yesterday might have helped cocoa in New York as arbitragers took advantage of the currency move . 
Sandra Kaul , research analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton , said the market pushed higher mainly in anticipation of a late harvest in the Ivory Coast , a major cocoa producer . 
Rockwell International Corp. bought out Ikegai Corp. 's interest in Ikegai-Goss , a joint venture of the two companies based in Tokyo . 
The price was 3.6 billion yen ( $ 25 million ) . 
The agreement provides that Ikegai Corp. will remain a supplier to Ikegai-Goss , which makes printing presses for the newspaper industry . 
The purchase was made by Rockwell Graphic Systems , a Chicago subsidiary of the El Segundo , Calif. , concern . 
Ikegai-Goss , which has about 200 employees , is among the industry leaders in keyless inking technology , which reduces time and materials waste when preparing a press for printing . 
The bond market , which sometimes thrives on bad news , cheered yesterday 's stock market sell-off and perceptions that the economy is growing weaker . 
Early in the day , bonds rose modestly on economists ' forecasts that this week 's slate of economic data will portray an economy headed for trouble . 
Such news is good for bonds because economic weakness sometimes causes the Federal Reserve to lower interest rates in an effort to stimulate the economy and stave off a recession . 
For example , today the Department of Commerce is scheduled to release the September durable goods report . 
The consensus forecast of 14 economists surveyed by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report is for a 1.2 % drop in September orders . 
That would follow a 3.9 % advance in August . 
Bonds received a bigger boost later in the day when stock prices moved broadly lower . 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 26.23 points to 2662.91 . 
`` Bond investors have been watching stocks closely , '' said Joel Marver , chief fixed-income analyst at Technical Data Global Markets Group . 
`` When you get a big sell-off in equities , money starts to shift into bonds , '' which are considered safer , he said . 
The Treasury 's benchmark 30-year bond ended about 1\/2 point higher , or up about $ 5 for each $ 1,000 face amount , while the yield slid to 7.93 % from 7.98 % Friday . 
Municipals ended mixed , while mortgage-backed and investment-grade corporate bonds rose . 
Prices of high-yield , high-risk corporate securities ended unchanged . 
In more evidence of the growing division between `` good '' and `` bad '' junk bonds , a $ 150 million issue by Imo Industries Inc. was snapped up by investors while underwriters for Beatrice Co. 's $ 350 million issue are considering restructuring the deal to attract buyers . 
In the Treasury market , analysts expect bond prices to trade in narrow ranges this week as the market takes in positive and negative news . 
`` On the negative side , the market will be affected by constant supply in all sectors of the market , '' said William M. Brachfeld , economist at Daiwa Securities America Inc . 
`` On the other hand , we have economic news that is { expected to be } relatively positive for the bond market . 
We will go back and forth with a tilt toward slightly lower yields , '' he said . 
Today , the Treasury will sell $ 10 billion of new two-year notes . 
Tomorrow , Resolution Funding Corp. , a division of a new government agency created to bail out the nation 's troubled thrifts , will hold its first bond auction at which it will sell $ 4.5 billion of 30-year bonds . 
So far , money managers and other bond buyers have n't shown much interest in the Refcorp bonds . 
Analysts have mixed views about the two-year note auction . 
While some say the auction should proceed smoothly , others contend that yesterday 's sale of $ 2.58 billion of asset-backed securities by Ford Motor Credit Corp. may have siphoned some potential institutional buyers from the government 's note sale . 
The division of auto maker Ford Motor Co. made its debut in the asset-backed securities market with the second-largest issue in the market 's four-year history . 
The company offered securities backed by automobile loans through an underwriting group headed by First Boston Corp . 
The issue yields 8.90 % and carries a guarantee covering 9 % of the deal from the company . 
First Boston sweetened the terms from the original yield estimate in an apparent effort to place the huge offering . 
The issue was offered at a yield nearly one percentage point above the yield on two-year Treasurys . 
The only asset-backed deal larger than Ford 's was a $ 4 billion offering by General Motors Acceptance Corp. in 1986 . 
Treasury Securities 
Treasury bonds were 1\/8 to 1\/2 point higher yesterday in light trading . 
The benchmark 30-year bond ended at a price of 102 3\/32 , compared with 101 17\/32 Friday . 
The latest 10-year notes were quoted late at 100 17\/32 to yield 7.90 % , compared with 100 3\/32 to yield 7.97 % . 
The latest two-year notes were quoted late at 100 28\/32 to yield 7.84 % . 
Short-term rates rose yesterday at the government 's weekly Treasury bill auction , compared with the previous bill sale . 
The Treasury sold $ 7.81 billion of three-month bills with an average discount rate of 7.52 % , the highest since the average of 7.63 % at the auction on Oct. 10 . 
The $ 7.81 billion of six-month Treasury bills were sold with an average discount rate of 7.50 % , the highest since the average of 7.60 % at the Oct. 10 auction . 
The rates were up from last week 's auction , when they were 7.37 % and 7.42 % , respectively . 
Here are auction details : 
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value . 
Thus , higher bidding narrows the investor 's return while lower bidding widens it . 
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year , while the coupon-equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year . 
Both issues are dated Oct. 26 . 
The 13-week bills mature Jan. 25 , 1990 , and the 26-week bills mature April 26 , 1990 . 
Corporate Issues 
Investment-grade corporates closed about 1\/4 point higher in quiet trading . 
In the junk bond market , Imo Industries ' issue of 12-year debentures , considered to be one of the market 's high-quality credits , was priced at par to yield 12 % . 
Peter Karches , managing director at underwriter Morgan Stanley & Co. , said the issue was oversubscribed . 
`` It 's a segmented market , and if you have a good , strong credit , people have an appetite for it , '' he said . 
Morgan Stanley is expected to price another junk bond deal , $ 350 million of senior subordinated debentures by Continental Cablevision Inc. , next Tuesday . 
In light of the recent skittishness in the high-yield market , junk bond analysts and traders expect other high-yield deals to be sweetened or restructured before they are offered to investors . 
In the case of Beatrice , Salomon Brothers Inc. is considering restructuring the reset mechanism on the $ 200 million portion of the offering . 
Under the originally contemplated terms of the offering , the notes would have been reset annually at a fixed spread above Treasurys . 
Under the new plan being considered , the notes would reset annually at a rate to maintain a market value of 101 . 
Price talk calls for the reset notes to be priced at a yield of between 13 1\/4 % and 13 1\/2 % . 
Mortgage-Backed Securities 
Activity in derivative markets was strong with four new real estate mortgage investment conduits announced and talk of several more deals in today 's session . 
The Federal National Mortgage Association offered $ 1.2 billion of Remic securities in three issues , and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. offered a $ 250 million Remic backed by 9 % 15-year securities . 
Part of the reason for the heavy activity in derivative markets is that underwriters are repackaging mortgage securities being sold by thrifts . 
Traders said thrifts have stepped up their mortgage securities sales as the bond market has risen in the past two weeks . 
In the mortgage pass-through sector , active issues rose but trailed gains in the Treasury market . 
Government National Mortgage Association 9 % securities for November delivery were quoted late yesterday at 98 10\/32 , up 10\/32 ; and Freddie Mac 9 % securities were at 97 1\/2 , up 1\/4 . 
The Ginnie Mae 9 % issue was yielding 8.36 % to a 12-year average life assumption , as the spread above the Treasury 10-year note widened slightly to 1.46 percentage points . 
Municipals 
A $ 575 million San Antonio , Texas , electric and gas system revenue bond issue dominated the new issue sector . 
The refunding issue , which had been in the wings for two months , was one of the chief offerings overhanging the market and limiting price appreciation . 
But alleviating that overhang failed to stimulate much activity in the secondary market , where prices were off 1\/8 to up 3\/8 point . 
An official with lead underwriter First Boston said orders for the San Antonio bonds were `` on the slow side . '' 
He attributed that to the issue 's aggressive pricing and large size , as well as the general lethargy in the municipal marketplace . 
In addition , he noted , the issue would normally be the type purchased by property and casualty insurers , but recent disasters , such as Hurricane Hugo and the Northern California earthquake , have stretched insurers ' resources and damped their demand for bonds . 
A $ 137.6 million Maryland Stadium Authority sports facilities lease revenue bond issue appeared to be off to a good start . 
The issue was oversubscribed and `` doing very well , '' according to an official with lead underwriter Morgan Stanley . 
Activity quieted in the New York City bond market , where heavy investor selling last week drove yields on the issuer 's full faith and credit backed bonds up as much as 0.50 percentage point . 
Foreign Bonds 
Japanese government bonds ended lower after the dollar rose modestly against the yen . 
The turnaround in the dollar fueled bearish sentiment about Japan 's bond market . 
The benchmark No. 111 4.6 % bond due 1998 ended on brokers ' screens at a price of 95.39 , off 0.28 . 
The yield rose to 5.38 % . 
West German bond prices ended lower after a day of aimless trading . 
The benchmark 7 % bond due October 1999 fell 0.20 point to 99.80 to yield 7.03 % , while the 6 3\/4 % notes due July 1994 fell 0.10 to 97.65 to yield 7.34 % . 
British government bonds ended slightly higher in quiet trading as investors looked ahead to today 's British trade report . 
The benchmark 11 3\/4 % Treasury bond due 2003\/2007 rose 1\/8 to 111 21\/32 to yield 10.11 % , while the 12 % issue of 1995 rose 3\/32 to 103 23\/32 to yield 11.01 % . 
`` The croaker 's done gone from the hook -- 
damn ! 
My language sure goes to pot down here on the coast . '' 
The husky blond guide with the Aggie cap twists his face in mock fury . 
`` I got to get back to school and straighten out my English . '' 
He has two more years at Texas A&M . 
Right now he takes people out to fish in the bays behind the barrier islands that curve for hundreds of miles along the eastern coast of Texas , enclosing milky green lagoons behind ridges of sand and grassy scrub that rim the deep blue of the Gulf beyond . 
There have been three days of hot , wind-swept rain , and now with the first sun we are after speckled seatrout , which with redfish provides most of the game fishing hereabouts . 
The little radio fizzes as other boats want to see if we have found any fish -- spotting location is everything in this sport . 
Negative answers crackle back . 
The fish often are plentiful around the pilings of the old gas wells that dot the flat surface like the remains of sunken ships . 
We go from one to the other . 
The sun is hot now though it 's only 8 in the morning . 
The great silver clouds on the horizon build themselves on the pale water . 
We cruise toward another set of pilings . 
The guide scoops into a pail and puts a frantically wiggling croaker on the hook . 
Then he casts out . 
`` Just wait for that tap-tap , that thump-thump . 
It comes real gentle before it pulls . 
Do n't forget , trout have very soft mouths . '' 
The radio queries again . 
`` Pickin ' one or two , '' says the guide , chuckling . 
`` You can tell they 've got nothin ' . '' 
A pair of black skimmers zig-zag past close to the surface . 
Soon we have our limit of the shimmering fish stippled in rose-gold and black . 
And we are the first back at the dock , where the great blue herons stand waiting by the cleaning benches . 
The guide is young and he knows this business but he wants a different life after college , such as working for IBM and wearing a necktie . 
This must be the last big stretch of the American seacoast that is `` undeveloped . '' 
There are a few ramshackle fishing towns with quiet atolls of resort houses nearby . 
People are not apt to be self-conscious about the place or themselves . 
Texas is big and beautiful and they live here , that 's all . 
Jutting out just to the north of us is the Blackjack Peninsula ( after the oak , not the game ) which forms the core of the Aransas Wildlife Refuge . 
It is famous as the winter home of the whooping crane , that symbol of the destruction of wild America . 
Last year a gunner shot a whooper by mistake thinking that it was a snow goose . 
He paid an immense fine and was lucky , according to a local wag , to escape the gas chamber . 
The peninsula comes off the vast southeastern alluvial plain with fields of rice and cotton and sorghum as far as the eye can see . 
Near the coast there are dense coverts of live oak interspersed with marshes and prairies . 
Deer , wild hog , armadillos and alligators are the glamour quadrupeds and the birds are innumerable , especially the herons and the spoonbills . 
Above the blossoms of lantana and scarlet pea the inky-brown and golden palamedes butterfly floats on its lazy wingbeat . 
Inland a few miles from the refuge there is a place called Tivoli , with a white church , a gas station and a grocery , the houses relatively close together for such a settlement in these parts . 
`` Tivoli Motel , '' I read a sign in the usual pronunciation of the name as we whoosh through . 
`` Here in south Texas we say Tie-vole-ee , '' my host gently corrects . 
Mr. King is the director of the Foreign Press Center in New York . 
AEG AG and Siemens AG said they will launch their previously announced joint venture for power semiconductors in January . 
The two West German electronics concerns said they have set up European Power Semiconductor Co. to merge their activities in the field . 
AEG and Siemens each will hold a 50 % stake in the venture . 
The joint venture will have nominal capital of 50 million marks ( $ 26.9 million ) and 700 employees . 
It will develop , produce and market high-performance electronic parts . 
Siemens is West Germany 's largest electronics group . 
AEG is 80 % owned by Daimler-Benz AG , the country 's biggest industrial concern . 
Dana Corp. said its third-quarter net income fell 27 % to $ 29.6 million , or 72 cents a share , from $ 40.7 million , or $ 1 a share , a year earlier . 
Sales dropped 4 % to $ 1.12 billion from $ 1.17 billion . 
The company , which supplies transmissions and other drive-train parts to auto makers , said about half the earnings drop came from the `` virtual collapse '' of the Venezuelan auto industry . 
The Venezuelan currency plummeted this year , making it difficult for auto makers there to afford imported parts . 
Dana also said it was hurt by slumping U.S. truck sales and by a strike at a parts supplier . 
The company , based in Toledo , Ohio , had said it expected reduced third-quarter profit . 
Mary Anne Sudol , an analyst at Fitch Investors in New York , said automotive suppliers were reporting lower profit almost `` across the board . '' 
Southwood J. Morcott , Dana 's president , said the company 's decision to approve its normal fourth-quarter dividend indicated its underlying strength . 
Norimasa Furuta , president of Japan 's Mazda Motor Corp. , said the Japanese car maker is planning joint production with Ford Motor Co. in Europe ahead of the European Community 's 1992 integration . 
Mr. Furuta did n't disclose further details of the arrangement at a news conference , but said the project would be undertaken with Ford 's European subsidiary . 
A Ford official confirmed in Tokyo that the U.S. motor vehicle maker is studying such an arrangement . 
At age eight , Josephine Baker was sent by her mother to a white woman 's house to do chores in exchange for meals and a place to sleep -- a place in the basement with the coal . 
At age 19 , she was a Paris sensation , transformed from unwanted child to international sex symbol in just over a decade . 
It is the stuff of dreams , but also of traumas . 
Only the bravest spirits survive such roller coasters . 
And , for Ms. Baker , the ride was far from over . 
Her bare breasts , her dancing , her voice , her beauty and , perhaps most famously , her derriere , were prominent attractions , but courage of a rare sort made her remarkable life possible . 
Bricktop , another American black woman who found a measure of fame in Paris , said : `` I do n't think I 've ever known anyone with a less complicated view of life , or whose life was more complicated than Josephine 's . '' 
Men were a constant complication . 
Baker had lots of them . 
But she did n't trust them and did n't reward trust . 
As she saw one key love affair , the problem was n't her infidelity , it was his jealousy . 
Her appetite for children also was large . 
She adopted 12 of assorted races , naming them the Rainbow Tribe , and driving her husband first to despair and then to Argentina . 
She made money , but spent more . 
Friends pitched in . 
Finally , Prince Rainier and Princess Grace saved her with the offer of a house in Monaco . 
Another lifelong complication , as Phyllis Rose makes clear in `` Jazz Cleopatra : Josephine Baker in Her Time '' ( Doubleday , 321 pages , $ 22.50 ) , was racism . 
Baker had the good luck to arrive in 1925 Paris , where blacks had become exotic . 
African art was in vogue and some intellectuals were writing breathlessly of a dawning age to be inspired by blacks . 
To be exotic was to be patronized as well as prized , but for the most part Paris was a friendly island in a racist world . 
Baker had bitter experience of bigotry from her St. Louis childhood and her days in New York theater , where she was judged too dark for an all-black chorus line ( performing of course for all-white audiences ) . 
Paris loved her at first sight . 
`` She just wiggled her fanny and all the French fell in love with her , '' sniffed the literary world 's Maria Jolas , not entirely inaccurately . 
`` One can hardly overemphasize the importance of her rear end , '' Ms. Rose writes . 
Ms. Rose , who teaches literature at Wesleyan University , quickly proceeds to overemphasize , claiming that Baker 's dancing `` had uncovered a new region for desire '' and thereby ignoring centuries of tributes to the callipygous . 
`` Jazz Cleopatra '' contains other , more important , false notes that undermine what is , for the most part , a lively account of a life already familiar from earlier works . 
It is easy to see why Baker , a free spirit who broke many of the restraints convention places on women , attracts Ms. Rose , the author of `` Parallel Lives , '' a wonderful study of Victorian marriage . 
Still , even the title raises questions about the author 's vision of her subject . 
Baker 's art was jazz only by the widest stretch of the term . 
To find parallels , other than sexual appeal , with Cleopatra , requires an equal stretch . 
Baker was 68 years old when she died in Paris , two days after the sold-out opening of her newest show : a movie-like ending to what was a cinematic life . 
In fact , Ms. Baker played scenes in Casablanca that could have made it into `` Casablanca . '' 
During World War II , her uncomplicated view of life led her to the conclusion that the Nazis were evil and must be resisted , a decision made by only about 2 % of French citizens . 
She was devoted to Charles de Gaulle 's cause , accepting great financial sacrifice and considerable risk to become first a spy and then a one-woman USO tour for the forces of Free France . 
In Humphrey Bogart 's nightclub , Victor Laszlo leads Free French sympathizers in `` La Marseillaise '' to drown out the Nazis . 
The night the Germans occupied all of France , Baker performed in Casablanca . 
The Free French wore black arm bands , and when she sang `` J'ai deux amours '' they wept . 
Ms. Rose is best on the early years and World War II . 
In her introduction , Ms. Rose writes that she feels she has much in common with Baker , but as `` Jazz Cleopatra '' goes on , it seems more rushed , as though the author were growing less interested . 
It does n't help that sometimes Ms. Rose 's language fails to deliver the effect she appears to want . 
One chapter opens : `` World War II was not one of France 's glorious moments . '' 
Elsewhere , in an attempt to explain without stating it plainly that Baker had a large gay following later in her career when she was an overdressed singer rather than underdressed dancer , Ms. Rose writes : `` She was a female impersonator who happened to be a woman . '' 
One devoted fan who fell under Baker 's spell in 1963 and began collecting Baker memorabilia was Bryan Hammond . 
In `` Josephine Baker '' ( Jonathan Cape , 304 pages , $ 35 ) , which was published in Britain last year and distributed in the U.S. this month , Mr. Hammond has used his collection to produce an album of photographs and drawings of the star . 
The text by Patrick O'Connor is a tough read , but the pictures make her magnetism clear and help explain why Ernest Hemingway called Baker `` The most sensational woman anybody ever saw . 
Or ever will . '' 
Mr. Lescaze is foreign editor of the Journal . 
Manville , having rid itself of asbestos , now sells fiberglass , forest products , minerals and industrial goods . 
Heady stuff it 's not . 
But Manville 's ownership is unusual , and it has caught the eye of some canny -- and patient -- investors . 
The Denver-based concern , which emerged from bankruptcy-law proceedings late last year , is controlled by the Manville Personal Injury Settlement Trust . 
The trust , which owns 80 % of Manville 's stock on a fully diluted basis , is a separate legal entity that is settling claims with asbestos victims . 
When and if the trust runs out of cash -- which seems increasingly likely -- it will need to convert its Manville stock to cash . 
But as an 80 % owner , if it tried to sell much of its stock in the market , it would likely depress the price of its shares . 
Some investors say there is a good chance that the trust will , instead , seek to convert the company 's shares to cash , in some sort of friendly restructuring that would n't involve just dumping stock on the market . 
`` Their principal asset is Manville common stock , '' says Jeffrey Halis , who runs Sabre Associates , an investment fund that owns Manville shares . 
`` If they tried to sell , they 'd be chasing their own tail . 
What makes the most sense is to find someone who wants to buy the whole company or cause a recapitalization of all shares . '' 
The trust is n't commenting on when it might need to liquefy its Manville stock . 
However , the trust 's cash flow from investments is far short of its payments to asbestos victims . 
Its cash and liquid securities fell by $ 338 million in the first six months of 1989 . 
The trust also will receive $ 75 million a year starting in 1991 on a bond it holds from Manville . 
And , beginning in 1992 , it will have a claim on as much as 20 % of Manville 's annual net income . 
Even so , the trust would seem to be facing a cash crunch . 
As of June 30 , it had settled only about 15,000 of the 81,000 received claims from asbestos victims , for an average of $ 40,424 each . 
( The average should drop over time , since the most expensive claims are being settled first ) . 
And as of midyear , settled but unpaid claims amounted to $ 136 million -- more than half the trust 's total of $ 268 million in cash and marketable securities . 
`` At some point , we 're going to need an infusion of funds , '' a person close to the trust says . 
Even before then , the trust may be eager to unload Manville stock . 
It does n't pay a dividend , and this trust needs income . 
Moreover , with 88 % of its assets tied up in Manville , the trust is badly in need of diversification . 
`` Obviously , a diversified portfolio would have less risk , '' the person close to the trust says . 
Manville itself does n't rule out a restructuring . 
Though the ink is barely dry on its new , post-bankruptcy law structure , Bill Bullock , Manville 's head of investor relations , says the company is continually pondering `` whether there is a better way to be structured . 
We understand that the trust is ultimately going to need to sell some of our shares , '' he says . 
Of course , one option would be for Manville to buy out the trust 's shares -- which would do little to benefit public stockholders . 
But the trust , in most cases , is forbidden from seeking a buyer for only its shares before November 1993 . 
And both the trust and Manville are seeking to avoid the bad publicity that , in the asbestos era , tarred the Manville name . 
Thus , analysts say , the trust is unlikely to do anything that would hurt Manville 's other shareholders . 
`` This is a rare case of a company with a big majority holder which will probably act in the interests of the minority holders , '' one investor says . 
Even if there is no restructuring , Manville seems to be attractive long-term . 
Its stock , at 9 5\/8 , trades at about 8 1\/2 times estimated 1989 earnings -- an appropriately low multiple for a company with recession-sensitive customers . 
Mr. Bullock says 45 % of revenues are tied to construction . 
Analysts predict little or no near-term growth . 
They are , nonetheless , high on Manville 's management . 
`` It 's one of the best in the business , '' says Salomon Brothers analyst Stephen Dobi . 
And he says Manville has the financial flexibility to buy other companies at the best possible moment when other construction-related firms are hurting and selling cheap . 
With a conservative debt-to-equity ratio of 1-to-1 -- and $ 329 million in cash -- Manville is indeed actively on the prowl . 
So far , as a price-conscious shopper , Manville has n't bought much . 
Paul Kleinaitis , an analyst at Duff & Phelps , says , `` Even though they have borrowing power , they have been disciplined about acquisitions . '' 
And Mr. Kleinaitis says that with 80 % of its stock in friendly hands , Manville is the rare publicly traded company that can ignore short-term stock fluctuations and plan for the long haul . 
Manville ( NYSE ; Symbol : MVL ) 
Business : Forest products and roofing 
Year ended Dec. 31 , 1988 : Sales : $ 2.06 billions Net loss : $ 1.30 billion \* 
Third quarter , Sept. 30 , 1989 : Per-share earnings : 30 cents vs. 44 cents \*\* 
Average daily trading volume : 74,351 shares 
Common shares outstanding : 120 million 
\* Includes $ 1.29 billion extraordinary charge . 
\*\* Year ago figure is restated . 
Emerson Electric Co. and Robert Bosch G.m.b.H. said the Federal Trade Commission has requested additional information from the two companies about their announced intention to acquire Vermont American Corp. for $ 40 a share , or about $ 440 million . 
Yesterday , in composite trading on the American Stock Exchange , Vermont American common closed at $ 39.75 , off 25 cents . 
The FTC 's request was `` not unusual '' and Emerson will make a `` full and prompt '' response , according to a spokesman . 
Spokesmen for Emerson and Vermont American , which has agreed to be acquired , said they do n't anticipate `` any problems '' with the completion of the transaction . 
An FTC spokesman said the matter is `` in a non-public posture at this time '' and declined to comment further . 
Emerson and Bosch , through their joint acquisition arm , Maple Acquisition , have begun a cash tender offer for all of Vermont 's common shares outstanding . 
The offer , set to expire Nov. 1 , may be extended pending the timing and resolution of the FTC request , the companies said . 
St. Louis-based Emerson and Stuttgart-based Bosch make electrical and electronic products , including power tools . 
The Vermont American acquisition is designed to enhance their position in the accessories portion of the power-tool industry . 
Santa Fe Pacific Corp. is preparing a plan to sell a 20 % stake in its large real estate unit to a California public employee pension fund for $ 400 million , after which it would spin off the realty operation to shareholders . 
The plan places an indicated value on the real estate operation , Santa Fe Pacific Realty Corp. , of $ 2 billion . 
Santa Fe Pacific directors are expected to review the plan at a meeting today , according to people familiar with the transaction . 
If approved , the sale is expected to close by year 's end , with the spinoff occurring by the end of 1992 . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday , Santa Fe Pacific closed at $ 20.625 , down 25 cents . 
Santa Fe Pacific Realty is a major California land and building owner whose prime properties include 1,850 undeveloped acres in the San Francisco Bay area , and several office sites . 
A spokesman said the properties survived without significant damage in last week 's Northern California earthquake . 
As a result of the partial sale and spinoff , the $ 56 billion California Public Employees Retirement System would obtain two seats on the board of the real estate operation , according to officials of the fund , who described the plan . 
A spokesman for Chicago-based Santa Fe Pacific confirmed that negotiations were being held with the fund . 
Also holding two seats each on the board , they said , would be Olympia & York Developments Ltd. , controlled by the Reichmann family of Canada , and Itel Corp. , controlled by Chicago businessman Sam Zell . 
The Reichmanns and Mr. Zell , the largest holders of Santa Fe Pacific stock , have been looking for ways to raise the value of their investments , including possible spinoffs . 
Itel bought a 17 % stake in Sante Fe Pacific last year and Olympia & York later purchased about a 20 % stake ; they would have interests in the new realty company in line with their holdings in Sante Fe Pacific . 
The sale and spinoff of the real estate unit is the first phase of what could lead to the breakup of Santa Fe Pacific into free-standing companies for its railroad and energy operations , as well as real estate . 
The debt-laden parent has been under pressure from large shareholders to boost the company 's share price . 
At the same time it has been caught in an earnings squeeze . 
The California pension fund 's planned investment in the real estate unit is unusual . 
Pension funds rarely own as much as a 20 % stake in what is expected to be a publicly traded company . 
In addition , pension funds are rarely given seats on company boards and most often try to avoid them because of legal concerns . 
But fund officials said the Santa Fe Pacific Realty investment provides an opportunity to buy a stake in a large real estate portfolio heavily weighted with California properties . 
It also marks a `` major commitment to { real estate } development , which we have n't been involved with before , '' said Dale Hanson , the fund 's executive director . 
Under the proposed plan , the fund would also lend Santa Fe Pacific Realty $ 75 million in the form of a note that would be convertible into additional shares of the realty company after the second year at the then-prevailing market price . 
The note would accrue interest at the rate of 13.5 % a year , which would be payable to the fund after five years , according to Stephen E. Roulac , a real estate consultant working for the fund . 
The purpose of the note is to provide added capital for the spun-off company in a form that will save it spending cash on immediate interest payments , Mr. Roulac said . 
The spun-off concern `` clearly will be one of the dominant real estate development companies with a prime portfolio , '' he said . 
For the last year , Santa Fe Pacific has redirected its real estate operations toward longer-term development of its properties , hurting profits that the parent had generated in the past from periodic sales from its portfolio . 
Real estate operating income for the first nine months fell to $ 71.9 million from $ 143 million a year earlier , the company said . 
In a statement late yesterday , Santa Fe Pacific 's chairman , Robert D. Krebs , said that Santa Fe Pacific Realty would repay more than $ 500 million in debt owed to the parent before the planned spinoff . 
That would help reduce Santa Fe Pacific 's remaining debt to about $ 600 million from a high of $ 3.7 billion in early 1988 . 
It was n't clear where Santa Fe Pacific expected to obtain the payment of more than $ 500 million , which would be well above the $ 400 million that California pension fund officials say they plan to provide . 
The realty unit might take on new debt or obtain additional investors , among other possibilities . 
The Santa Fe Pacific spokesman declined to comment on that aspect , saying the deal was still under negotiation . 
Santa Fe Pacific Realty owns 2.8 million acres of property , including 219 buildings with more than 11 million square feet of space . 
It also holds nearly 40,000 acres of raw land with development potential , but under a previously announced strategy , the company has targeted building on 5,400 acres in California , Arizona and the Chicago area . 
Among those are the 1,850 acres in the San Francisco Bay area , including 208 acres in the Mission Bay area . 
The California pension fund , which has $ 16 billion already invested in real estate and mortgages , could be a valuable funding source for that development , although it is n't obliged to make further investments . 
The fund is the nation 's largest public employee fund , and it has a growing cash flow now topping $ 3 billion a year . 
Fund officials negotiated the final structure of the proposed deal with Santa Fe Pacific , but they were approached with the idea by real estate brokers JMB Realty Corp. of Chicago . 
JMB officials are expected to be hired to represent the pension fund on the Santa Fe Pacific Realty board , Mr. Roulac said , to insulate the fund from potential liability problems . 
GAF , Part III is scheduled to begin today . 
After two mistrials , the stakes in the stock manipulation trial of GAF Corp. and its vice chairman , James T. Sherwin , have changed considerably . 
The first two GAF trials were watched closely on Wall Street because they were considered to be important tests of the government 's ability to convince a jury of allegations stemming from its insider-trading investigations . 
In an eight-count indictment , the government charged GAF , a Wayne , N.J. , chemical maker , and Mr. Sherwin with illegally attempting to manipulate the common stock of Union Carbide Corp. in advance of GAF 's planned sale of a large block of the stock in 1986 . 
The government 's credibility in the GAF case depended heavily on its star witness , Boyd L. Jefferies , the former Los Angeles brokerage chief who was implicated by former arbitrager Ivan Boesky , and then pointed the finger at Mr. Sherwin , takeover speculator Salim B. Lewis and corporate raider Paul Bilzerian . 
The GAF trials were viewed as previews of the government 's strength in its cases against Mr. Lewis and Mr. Bilzerian . 
Mr. Jefferies 's performance as a witness was expected to affect his sentencing . 
But GAF 's bellwether role was short-lived . 
The first GAF trial ended in a mistrial after four weeks when U.S. District Judge Mary Johnson Lowe found that a prosecutor improperly , but unintentionally , withheld a document . 
After 93 hours of deliberation , the jurors in the second trial said they were hopelessly deadlocked , and another mistrial was declared on March 22 . 
Meanwhile , a federal jury found Mr. Bilzerian guilty on securities fraud and other charges in June . 
A month later , Mr. Jefferies was spared a jail term by a federal judge who praised him for helping the government . 
In August , Mr. Lewis pleaded guilty to three felony counts . 
Nevertheless , the stakes are still high for the players directly involved in the GAF case . 
The mistrials have left the reputations of GAF , Mr. Sherwin and GAF Chairman Samuel Heyman in limbo . 
For Mr. Sherwin , a conviction could carry penalties of five years in prison and a $ 250,000 fine on each count . 
GAF faces potential fines of $ 500,000 for each count . 
Individuals familiar with the case said that throughout September , defense attorneys were talking with the government in an effort to prevent a trial , but by the end of the month the talks had ended . 
There is much speculation among attorneys not involved that the strategy of GAF 's attorney , Arthur Liman , and Mr. Sherwin 's counsel , Stephen Kaufman , will include testimony by Mr. Sherwin or Mr. Heyman . 
Neither testified at the previous trials . 
For now , defense attorneys are tight-lipped about their plans . 
Max Gitter , another GAF defense attorney , said yesterday , `` As we go in for the third time , Yogi Berra 's famous line is apt : ` It 's deja vu all over again . ' '' 
DALKON SHIELD CLAIMANTS hope to stop reorganization-plan appeal . 
Attorneys for more than 18,000 women who claim injuries from the Dalkon Shield contraceptive device have asked the U.S. Supreme Court to refuse to hear an appeal of the bankruptcy-law reorganization plan for A.H. Robins Co. , which manufactured the device . 
The dispute pits two groups of claimants against each other . 
Baltimore attorney Michael A. Pretl and 17 other attorneys representing 18,136 claimants in the U.S. and abroad argue that the appeal would delay -- and perhaps even destroy -- a $ 2.38 billion settlement fund that is the centerpiece of the reorganization plan . 
The bankruptcy-court reorganization is being challenged before the Supreme Court by a dissident group of claimants because it places a cap on the total amount of money available to settle claims . 
It also bars future suits against Robins company officials , members of the Robins family and Robins 's former insurer , Aetna Life & Casualty Co . 
The latter provision is `` legally unprecedented , '' said Alan B. Morrison , a public interest lawyer in Washington , D.C. , who is challenging the plan on behalf of 900 claimants . 
More than 100,000 claims against Robins are pending . 
The company made and marketed the Dalkon Shield in the early 1970s amid mounting evidence that it could cause serious injuries . 
Robins has been in proceedings under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code since August 1985 ; such proceedings give it protection from creditor lawsuits while it works out a plan for paying its debts . 
American Home Products Corp. wants to acquire Robins , but only if all legal challenges to the plan are exhausted . 
In a brief filed with the Supreme Court last week , Mr. Pretl criticizes the appeal for raising `` abstract '' and `` theoretical '' legal issues , while jeopardizing the proposed reorganization and the settlement payments to claimants . 
The Supreme Court is scheduled to consider the case Nov. 3 and may issue a decision as early as Nov. 6 . 
JURY 'S CRIMINAL CONVICTION under Superfund law is a first . 
Charles A. Donohoo , sole proprieter of a Louisville , Ky. , demolition company , was found guilty of violating the Superfund law as well as the Clean Air Act . 
Criminal convictions under the federal Superfund law are rare , and the decision is the first jury verdict in such a case . 
Under Superfund , those who owned , generated or transported hazardous waste are liable for its cleanup , regardless of whether their actions were legal at the time . 
Environmental lawyers say virtually all of the Superfund cases to date have involved civil penalties designed to insure cleanup of past polluting activities . 
But Superfund also contains a criminal provision concerning the release of toxic substances into the environment . 
In 1986 Congress strengthened the penalty by making it a felony . 
Mr. Donohoo was convicted in Louisville late last month of violating Superfund by failing to report the release of asbestos into the environment from a building he was demolishing . 
He was also convicted of failing to properly remove asbestos from the building , a violation of the Clean Air Act . 
The government sought a criminal penalty because `` no cleanup is possible here . 
Once { asbestos } is released into the environment , it can lodge anywhere , '' says Richard A. Dennis , the assistant U.S. attorney who prosecuted the case . 
Mr. Donohoo is scheduled to be sentenced Dec. 11 . 
His lawyer could not be reached for comment . 
Mr. Donohoo faces as much as three years in prison and a $ 250,000 fine for the Superfund conviction and as much as one year in prison and a $ 100,000 fine for the violation of the Clean Air Act . 
TED BUNDY'S LAWYERS switch to victims ' side in death-sentence case . 
Wilmer , Cutler & Pickering , the Washington , D.C. , law firm that spent over $ 1 million fighting the execution of mass-murderer Ted Bundy -- who eventually was executed -- has taken on another death penalty case before the Supreme Court , this time on the side of the family of four murder victims in Arkansas . 
The law firm has filed a friend-of-the-court brief jointly with the Washington Legal Foundation , a conservative legal group . 
The key issue in the case , which the law firm is handling without a fee , or pro bono , is whether a person sentenced to death can voluntarily waive his rights of appellate review . 
The murderer , Ronald Gene Simmons , was convicted of killing 14 people . 
Another murderer on death row has appealed Mr. Simmons 's death sentence in a `` next friend '' capacity . 
Wilmer Cutler 's brief argues that there is no mandatory appellate review of capital sentences and that the inmate who filed the appeal lacks proper standing . 
P.J. Mode , Wilmer Cutler 's managing partner , says the trial team that represented Mr. Bundy was asked by the firm 's pro bono committee whether the new case posed a conflict and that no objections were raised . 
The coupling of the law firm and the Washington Legal Foundation is odd also , because Wilmer Cutler was one of the firms singled out for criticism two years ago by the conservative legal group for displaying a liberal bias in its pro bono work . 
`` We give them a lot of credit for taking this case , '' says WLF 's Alan Slobodin . 
THE CASE OF THE FAKE DALIS : 
In federal court in Manhattan , three defendants pleaded guilty to charges of fraud in connection with the sale of fake Salvador Dali lithographs . 
James Burke and Larry Evans , formerly owners of the now-defunct Barclay Gallery , and Prudence Clark , a Barclay sales representative , were charged with conducting high-pressure telephone sales in which they misrepresented cheap copies of Dali artwork as signed , limited-edition lithographs . 
The posters were sold for $ 1,300 to $ 6,000 , although the government says they had a value of only $ 53 to $ 200 apiece . 
Henry Pitman , the assistant U.S. attorney handling the case , said about 1,000 customers were defrauded and that Barclay 's total proceeds from the sales were $ 3.4 million . 
Attorneys for Messrs. Burke and Evans and Ms. Clarke said that although their clients admitted to making some misrepresentations in the sales , they had believed that the works were authorized by Mr. Dali , who died in January . 
The posters were printed on paper pre-signed by Mr. Dali , the attorneys said . 
Westamerica Bancorp. said Richard W. Decker resigned as president and chief executive officer after only a year on the job because of `` differences '' with the board . 
The banking company could n't be reached to comment beyond a written announcement . 
It did n't specify the nature of the differences , saying only that they related to `` management style '' and `` strategic objectives . '' 
Westamerica said Mr. Decker 's posts were assumed by David Payne , Westamerica 's chairman , who at 34 years of age becomes one of the youngest chief executives of a sizable bank in the country . 
Mr. Decker is about 45 years old . 
Neither Mr. Payne nor Mr. Decker could be reached to comment . 
Westamerica has about $ 1.3 billion of assets and is the largest independent bank in northern California . 
It controls about 35 % of the affluent Marin County market across the Golden Gate bridge from San Francisco . 
Mr. Decker 's resignation surprised many industry officials . 
He was brought to the company in September 1988 after 15 years at Los Angeles-based First Interstate Bancorp . 
The bank had been suffering in late 1987 from a slew of bad real estate loans made in Arizona . 
When he was hired , Mr. Payne lauded Mr. Decker 's `` extraordinary ... skills '' and his `` outstanding reputation as one of the West 's brightest bankers . '' 
Though the bank is n't performing as well as some of its competitors in the lucrative California market , its condition has improved since Mr. Decker took over . 
For the six months ended June 30 , it earned $ 3.1 million , or 61 cents a share , compared with net income of $ 2.4 million , or 41 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Its stock also has risen lately , at least partly because it is considered a possible takeover candidate . 
Interstate banking is scheduled to begin in California in 1991 , and larger California banks , such as Wells Fargo & Co. , have been paying fat premiums to buy smaller banks to control markets before any out-of-state banks enter the fray . 
In American Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Westamerica closed at $ 22.25 a share , down 75 cents . 
Varian Associates Inc. , Palo Alto , Calif. , reported fiscal fourth-quarter profit plunged more than 95 % to $ 1 million , or five cents a share , from $ 24.2 million , or $ 1.10 a share , in the year-earlier quarter . 
The diversified electronics company blamed the decline in the quarter ended Sept. 29 , on previously reported operating problems in its Electron Devices & Systems Group . 
For the full fiscal year , Varian posted a 13 % profit rise to $ 31.5 million , or $ 1.53 a share , up from $ 27.8 million , or $ 1.27 a share , last year . 
Sales for the year rose almost 15 % to $ 1.34 billion from $ 1.17 billion last year . 
A profit last year in both the quarter and year included a net gain of $ 9.6 million , or 44 cents a share , from the sale of a division . 
Additionally , the full-year profit last year reflected an after-tax restructuring charge of $ 22.8 million , or $ 1.04 a share . 
Shares of Varian , which last month warned there would be a fourth-quarter plunge , closed at $ 22.75 , down 62.5 cents in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
Sales rose 18 % in the fiscal fourth quarter to $ 364.1 million from $ 307.9 million on the strength in semiconductors and other products . 
In a last-ditch effort to keep its sales force and customer base , Integrated Resources Inc. said it agreed in principle to transfer ownership of its broker-dealer subsidiary to two of its top executives . 
The financial-services firm , struggling since summer to avoid a bankruptcy-law filing after missing interest payments on about $ 1 billion of debt , will retain the right to regain the subsidiary . 
It said it will exercise that right only if it sells substantially all of its other core businesses . 
It also can sell the right to regain the subsidiary to another party . 
Also , the broker-dealer subsidiary , Integrated Resources Equity Corp. , was renamed Royal Alliance Associates Inc . 
Because of Integrated 's widely reported troubles , the unit 's representatives had been requesting a name change . 
Royal Alliance , to which the 3,900 representatives ' licenses will be transferred , is a shell company Integrated owns . 
In the transaction , Integrated will transfer 100 % ownership of the subsidiary to Gerard M. Lavin , executive vice president of Integrated and head of back-office operations at the subsidiary , and Gary W. Krat , executive vice president of the parent and president of the subsidiary . 
Integrated will pump $ 3.5 million to $ 4 million into Royal Alliance as initial funding . 
In an interview , Mr. Krat said that based on criteria yet to be determined , he expects to distribute 49 % of Royal Alliance to the representatives , who sell Integrated 's insurance and mutual-fund products . 
If Integrated regains Royal Alliance , the representatives will retain their 49 % ownership . 
Mr. Krat indicated that completion of the transaction could take several weeks , and it was n't immediately clear what would happen to the broker-dealer subsidiary if Integrated files for bankruptcy-law protection in the meantime . 
The subsidiary is n't expected to be profitable for at least one year . 
If Integrated regains the unit , it would receive any profit the unit reports , even while the unit is independent . 
If the deal closes , the two officers will draw salaries from the independent operation , not from Integrated . 
Many aspects of the agreement were worked out Wednesday in Chicago , when Integrated senior managers met with about 150 representatives . 
`` I think it was something that we and they thought was constructive , '' said Stephen D. Weinroth , chairman and co-chief executive officer of Integrated . 
Integrated made its announcement after the market closed . 
In New York Stock Exchange Composite trading , Integrated shares closed at $ 1.125 , up 12.5 cents . 
The dollar weakened in indecisive trading as foreign-exchange dealers awaited fresh economic news that they hope will jolt the U.S. unit out of its narrow ranges . 
The Canadian dollar climbed to its highest level against the U.S. dollar since late August , prompting the Bank of Canada to sell the Canadian currency on the market . 
Traders say that after a week of nervously tracking every development on Wall Street , the foreign-exchange market has settled back to catch its breath ahead of new U.S. economic data . 
They noted , however , that a 26-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average gave the dollar a sharp nudge downward late in the day . 
In late New York trading yesterday , the dollar was quoted at 1.8470 marks , down from 1.8578 marks late Friday , and at 141.90 yen , down from 142.43 yen late Friday . 
Sterling was quoted at $ 1.6030 , up from $ 1.5885 late Friday . 
In Tokyo Tuesday , the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.80 yen , down from Monday 's Tokyo close of 142.40 yen . 
The market 's attention is especially focused on a preliminary report on the U.S. third-quarter gross national product , due out Thursday , which could show the economy is continuing to expand at a relatively brisk pace . 
The consensus view on real GNP , the total value of the U.S. output of goods and services adjusted for inflation , calls for a 2.3 % gain on an annual basis , slowing somewhat from the second quarter 's 2.5 % , but still fairly strong . 
Few market participants expect the U.S. unit to rally sharply on the news , if it turns out as expected . 
Many contend that the report may overstate the economy 's health and predict the third-quarter figures may be the last vigorous statistics for some time to come . 
`` Everyone is waiting for GNP , '' says Walter Simon , an assistant treasurer with Bank Julius Baer & Co . 
`` Yet even a relatively strong number -- 2.8 % to 2.9 % -- wo n't alter the market 's view that the economy is softening . '' 
Hubert Pedroli , managing director of foreign exchange at Credit Suisse in New York , adds , `` The market sees this as the last piece of good news . '' 
Mr. Pedroli notes that the GNP deflator , a measure of inflation , is expected to slow , which would give the Federal Reserve more room to ease key U.S. rates . 
Analysts predict a 3.5 % rise in the deflator , after climbing 4.6 % in the second quarter . 
They note that when an unexpectedly sharp widening in the U.S. trade gap in August was reported earlier this month , hopes for a sustained narrowing of the trade deficit were dashed and sentiment gripped the market that the U.S. economy was losing its momentum . 
A 190-point plunge in U.S. stock shares compounded the view , they say . 
`` Everyone is extremely convinced the economy is slowing , '' says one senior New York dealer . 
`` If we 're not headed for a recession , we 're certainly headed for a major slowdown . '' 
While the market expects little reaction from news of U.S. durable goods orders , scheduled for release today , participants note that the figures will probably serve to reinforce this bearish sentiment . 
U.S. durable goods orders are expected to show a decline of 1.2 % in September , according to economists . 
The anticipated drop follows a 3.9 % rise in August . 
Traders , however , are quick to point out that while there is little enthusiasm for buying dollars , the U.S. unit has found a `` natural bottom '' at about 1.85 marks and 140 yen . 
Its resilience around these levels is pegged to persistent investor demand for the greenback , especially in Japan . 
On the Commodity Exchange in New York , gold for current delivery settled at $ 367 an ounce , down 30 cents . 
Estimated volume was a very light one million ounces . 
In early trading in Hong Kong Tuesday , gold was quoted at $ 366.79 an ounce . 
Liz Claiborne Inc. , New York , said its third-quarter net income jumped 62 % , citing continued strength in apparel sales and the start of shipments of its new product lines : a men 's fragrance , large-size women 's apparel and casual knitwear . 
The big apparel maker and retailer said that its net income in the latest quarter increased to $ 51.1 million , or 58 cents a share , from $ 31.7 million , or 36 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales in the quarter gained 29 % to $ 410.4 million from $ 317.7 million a year earlier . 
Claiborne shares closed yesterday at $ 25.125 , up 50 cents , in national over-the-counter trading . 
Claiborne 's directors also declared its regular cash dividend payment of five cents a share payable on Dec. 5 to shareholders of record at the close of business on Nov. 13 . 
For the nine months , net income rose 48 % to $ 124.2 million , or $ 1.41 a share , from $ 83.8 million , or 96 cents a share a year earlier . 
Sales gained 16 % to $ 1.03 billion from $ 894 million . 
Tokyo stocks closed firmer Monday , with the Nikkei index making its fifth consecutive daily gain . 
Stocks also rose in London , while the Frankfurt market was mixed . 
In Tokyo , the Nikkei index added 99.14 to 35585.52 . 
The index moved above 35670 at midmorning , nearly reaching the record of 35689.98 set Sept. 28 . 
But the market lost part of the early gains on index-linked investment trust fund selling . 
In early trading in Tokyo Tuesday , the Nikkei index rose 1.08 points to 35586.60 . 
On Monday , traders noted that some investors took profits against the backdrop of the Nikkei 's fast-paced recovery following its plunge last Monday in reaction to the Oct. 13 drop in New York stock prices . 
But overall buying interest remained strong through Monday , with many observers saying they expect the Nikkei to continue with moderate gains this week . 
Turnover remained relatively small . 
Volume on the first section was estimated at 600 million shares , down from 1.03 billion shares Friday . 
The Tokyo stock price index of first section issues was up 7.81 at 2687.53 . 
Relatively stable foreign currency dealings Monday were viewed favorably by market players , traders said . 
But institutional investors may wait a little longer to appraise the direction of the U.S. monetary policy and the dollar , traders said . 
Hiroyuki Wada , general manager of the stock department at Okasan Securities , said Monday 's trading was `` unfocused . '' 
He said investors were picking individual stocks based on specific incentives and the likelihood of a wider price increase over the short term . 
The selective approach blurred themes such as domestic-demand issues , large-capitalization issues or high-technology shares , which had been providing at least some trading direction over the past few weeks , Mr. Wada said . 
Investors took profits on major construction shares , which advanced last week , shifting their attention to some midsize companies such as Aoki Corp. , Tobishima and Maeda . 
Aoki gained 60 yen to 1,480 yen ( $ 10.40 ) . 
Some pharmaceutical shares were popular on rumors related to new products to be introduced at a cancer conference that opened in Nagoya . 
Teijin was up 15 at 936 , and Kyowa Hakko gained 30 to 1,770 . 
Mochida advanced 40 to 4,440 . 
Fujisawa continued to attract investors because of strong earning prospects stemming from a new immune control agent . 
Fujisawa gained 50 to 2,060 . 
Kikkoman was up 30 to 1,600 , receiving investor interest for its land property holdings near Tokyo , a trader said . 
London prices closed modestly higher in the year 's thinnest turnover , a condition that underscored a lack of conviction ahead of a U.K. balance of payments report Tuesday . 
Limited volume ahead of the September trade data showed the market is nervous , but dealers added that the day 's modest gains also signaled some support for London equities . 
They pegged the support largely to anticipation that Britain 's current account imbalance ca n't be much worse than the near record deficits seen in July and August . 
`` It 's a case of the market being too high to buy and too afraid to sell , '' a senior dealer with Kleinwort Benson Securities said . 
`` It 's better to wait . '' 
The Financial Times 100-share index finished 10.6 points higher at 2189.7 . 
The 30-share index closed 11.6 points higher at 1772.6 . 
Volume was 276.8 million shares , beneath the year 's previous low of 280.5 million shares Sept. 25 , the session before the August trade figures were released . 
Analysts ' expectations suggest a September current account deficit of # 1.6 billion ( $ 2.54 billion ) , compared with August 's # 2.0 billion deficit . 
Dealers , however , said forecasts are broadly divergent with estimates ranging between # 1 billion and # 2 billion . 
`` The range of expectations is so broad , '' a dealer at another major U.K. brokerage firm said , `` the deficit may have to be nearer or above # 2 billion for it to have any impact on the market . '' 
Lucas Industries , a British automotive and aerospace concern , rose 13 pence to 614 pence after it said its pretax profit for the year rose 28 % . 
Share prices on the Frankfurt stock exchange closed narrowly mixed in quiet dealings after recovering most of their early losses . 
The DAX index eased 0.99 point to end at 1523.22 after falling 5.5 points early in the session . 
Brokers said the declines early in the day were partly caused by losses of the ruling Christian-Democratic Union in communal elections in the state of Baden-Wuerttemberg . 
The start of a weeklong conference by the IG Metall metal worker union in Berlin is drawing attention to the impending wage negotiations , which could boost companies ' personnel costs next year , they said . 
But there was little selling pressure , and even small orders at the lower levels sufficed to bring the market back to Friday 's opening levels . 
Traders said the thin trading volume points to continued uncertainty by most investors following last Monday 's record 13 % loss . 
The market is still 4 % short of its level before the plunge , and analysts are n't sure how long it will take until the DAX has closed that gap . 
But Norbert Braeuer , chief trader at Hessische Landesbank Girozentrale ( Helaba ) , said he expects share prices to move upward in the coming weeks . 
Banking stocks were the major gainers Monday amid hope that interest rates have peaked , as Deutsche Bank and Dresdner Bank added 4 marks each to 664 marks ( $ 357 ) and 326 marks , respectively . 
Commerzbank gained 1 to 252.5 . 
Auto shares were mixed , as Daimler-Benz firmed 2 to 723 , Bayerische Motoren Werke lost the same amount to 554 , and Volkswagen inched down 1.4 to 451.6 . 
Elsewhere , prices closed higher in Amsterdam , lower in Zurich , Stockholm and Milan , mixed in Brussels and unchanged in Paris . 
Shares closed higher in Hong Kong , Singapore and Manila , and were lower in Sydney , Seoul and Taipei . 
Wellington was closed . 
Here are price trends on the world 's major stock markets , as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective , Geneva . 
To make them directly comparable , each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100 . 
The percentage change is since year-end . 
Enviropact Inc. said it entered into an agreement in principle to sell its pump and tank division and drilling division to GSX Chemical Services for $ 4 million . 
The Miami-based environmental engineering concern said GSX Chemical also will assume about $ 1.6 million in debt related to those divisions . 
Further , GSX will buy $ 1 million of Enviropact common stock , at $ 2.625 a share , plus an option to acquire an additional $ 1.5 million of common at the same price , the company said . 
In American Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Enviropact closed at $ 3 a share , up 25 cents . 
Enviropact said the two divisions account for about $ 8 million of the company 's $ 20 million in annual revenue . 
The transaction is expected to close within about 20 days , the company added . 
Enviropact said the proceeds will be used as working capital for expansion and to pay its existing tax liability of about $ 1.5 million that was due Sept. 15 . 
GSX is a unit of Laidlaw Transportation Ltd. of Burlington , Canada . 
Monday , October 23 , 1989 
The key U.S. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but do n't always represent actual transactions . 
PRIME RATE : 10 1\/2 % . 
The base rate on corporate loans at large U.S. money center commercial banks . 
FEDERAL FUNDS : 8 3\/4 % high , 8 11\/16 % low , 8 11\/16 % near closing bid , 8 3\/4 % offered . 
Reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $ 1 million or more . 
Source : Fulton Prebon ( U.S.A . ) Inc . 
DISCOUNT RATE : 7 % . 
The charge on loans to depository institutions by the New York Federal Reserve Bank . 
CALL MONEY : 9 3\/4 % to 10 % . 
The charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER placed directly by General Motors Acceptance Corp. : 8.50 % 2 to 44 days ; 8.25 % 45 to 69 days ; 8.40 % 70 to 89 days ; 8.20 % 90 to 119 days ; 8.05 % 120 to 149 days ; 7.90 % 150 to 179 days ; 7.50 % 180 to 270 days . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER : High-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $ 1,000 : 8.575 % 30 days ; 8.50 % 60 days ; 8.45 % 90 days . 
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT : 8.09 % one month ; 8.09 % two months ; 8.06 % three months ; 8 % six months ; 7.94 % one year . 
Average of top rates paid by major New York banks on primary new issues of negotiable C.D.s , usually on amounts of $ 1 million and more . 
The minimum unit is $ 100,000 . 
Typical rates in the secondary market : 8.60 % one month ; 8.60 % three months ; 8.40 % six months . 
BANKERS ACCEPTANCES : 8.50 % 30 days ; 8.32 % 60 days ; 8.32 % 90 days ; 8.16 % 120 days ; 8.05 % 150 days ; 7.96 % 180 days . 
Negotiable , bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order . 
LONDON LATE EURODOLLARS : 8 3\/4 % to 8 5\/8 % one month ; 8 11\/16 % to 8 9\/16 % two months ; 8 3\/4 % to 8 5\/8 % three months ; 8 5\/8 % to 8 1\/2 % four months ; 8 9\/16 % to 8 7\/16 % five months ; 8 9\/16 % to 8 7\/16 % six months . 
LONDON INTERBANK OFFERED RATES ( LIBOR ) : 8 3\/4 % one month ; 8 3\/4 % three months ; 8 9\/16 % six months ; 8 1\/2 % one year . 
The average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the London market based on quotations at five major banks . 
FOREIGN PRIME RATES : Canada 13.50 % ; Germany 9 % ; Japan 4.875 % ; Switzerland 8.50 % ; Britain 15 % . 
These rate indications are n't directly comparable ; lending practices vary widely by location . 
Results of the Monday , October 23 , 1989 , auction of short-term U.S. government bills , sold at a discount from face value in units of $ 10,000 to $ 1 million : 7.52 % , 13 weeks ; 7.50 % , 26 weeks . 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP . ( Freddie Mac ) : Posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days . 9.86 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 7.875 % , 2 % rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION ( Fannie Mae ) : Posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days ( priced at par ) . 9.80 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 8.75 % , 6\/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
MERRILL LYNCH READY ASSETS TRUST : 8.56 % . 
Annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days ; not a forecast of future returns . 
Bankers Trust New York Corp. , as expected , reported a third-quarter loss of $ 1.42 billion , or $ 17.39 a share , following its $ 1.6 billion boost in reserves for losses on loans to less-developed countries . 
The loss compares with net income of $ 162.1 million , or $ 2.01 a share , in the year-earlier period . 
Interest income rose 29 % to about $ 1.35 billion from $ 1.05 billion . 
The New York bank holding company 's assets at Sept. 30 climbed to $ 59.4 billion from $ 57.9 billion . 
Excluding the increase in loan-loss reserves , Bankers Trust said third-quarter net income would have increased 11 % to $ 180 million . 
A number of major banks have posted big losses after sharply increasing loan-loss reserves . 
Most of the loans in question are to Third World countries in South America . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Bankers Trust fell 12.5 cents to $ 50.50 . 
BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB Co . ( New York ) -- 
Gerald C. Beddall , 47 years old , was named president of the Clairol division of this pharmaceuticals and health-care company . 
He succeeds C. Benjamin Brooks Jr. , who will retire Nov. 1 . 
Mr. Brooks declined to give his age , but he said his leaving is a normal retirement . 
Mr. Beddall had been executive vice president of the division since April . 
Clairol , which makes hair and skin products , was a division of Bristol-Myers Co. before that company 's merger with Squibb Corp . 
Annualized interest rates on certain investments as reported by the Federal Reserve Board on a weekly-average basis : 
a - Discounted rate . 
b - Week ended Wednesday , October 18 , 1989 and Wednesday October 11 , 1989 . 
c - Yields , adjusted for constant maturity . 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. said it will spend $ 20 million to build a factory in Guadalajara , Mexico , to make telephone answering machines . 
Construction of the 265,000-square-foot facility will begin next year , with production expected to start in late 1991 . 
When fully operational , the Guadalajara factory will employ about 1,500 workers and have annual operating expenses of $ 5 million to $ 6 million . 
An AT&T representative said that the Guadalajara factory will make a full line of answering machines . 
AT&T already has a factory in Matamoros , Mexico , to make electrical devices . 
It also purchases data systems products from a manufacturer based in Monterrey . 
Lucas Industries PLC , a British maker of industrial parts and systems , reported a 28 % rise in pretax profit for the year to July 31 , helped in particular by a 32 % jump in operating profit at its aerospace division . 
Pretax profit in the latest year climbed to # 187.1 million ( $ 297.1 million ) from # 146.3 million ( $ 232.3 million ) . 
Profit after taxes and minority interests but before extraordinary items climbed 27 % to # 143.4 million from # 112.5 million , with earnings per share rising to 85.1 pence ( $ 1.35 ) from 79.4 pence ( $ 1.26 ) . 
The results were at the upper end of market expectations , which ranged from # 185 million to # 188 million . 
TW Services Inc. posted a $ 3.3 million third-quarter net loss , compared with a $ 24.9 million profit , reflecting $ 60 million of expenses related to its much-publicized proposed takeover by Coniston Partners . 
The per-share loss for the Paramus , N.J. , food-services concern totaled seven cents , compared with earnings of 51 cents a share a year earlier . 
Revenue rose 5 % to $ 981.7 million from $ 934.7 million . 
Coniston , a New York investment partnership , awaits a vote by TW 's shareholders , scheduled for Friday , on Coniston 's $ 34-a-share , or $ 1.66 billion , offer for TW . 
Nine-month net income dropped 47 % to $ 26.3 million , or 54 cents a share , from $ 49.7 million , or $ 1.02 a share . 
Revenue rose 6 % to $ 2.79 billion from $ 2.63 billion . 
Cummins Engine Co. , Columbus , Ind. , hurt by a drop in engine orders from heavy-truck makers , reported a third-quarter loss of $ 39.7 million , or $ 4.12 a share , on essentially flat sales of $ 807.6 million . 
In the year-earlier period , the maker of diesel engines and parts had a narrower deficit of $ 17.6 million , or $ 1.84 a share , with sales of $ 808.3 million . 
A spokeswoman said shipments of truck engines , which provide a higher margin than most of the company 's other products , declined 16 % from a year earlier . 
Although Cummins 's stock stumbled last month after the company projected a `` substantial '' third-period loss , the stock also fell $ 1.125 in composite New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday , to $ 51.75 . 
It traded as high as $ 64 a month ago , before the loss projection . 
For the nine months , the latest loss trimmed net income to $ 3.6 million , which after payment of preferred dividends represented a 31-cent loss a common share . 
The year-before loss was $ 8.4 million , or $ 1.36 a common share . 
Exxon Corp. filed suit against the state of Alaska , charging state officials interfered with the oil company 's initial efforts to treat last spring 's giant oil spill . 
The action is a counterclaim to a suit filed by Alaska in August against Exxon and six other oil companies . 
The state 's suit alleges that Exxon 's response to the spill failed to prevent contamination of hundreds of miles of shoreline along Prince William Sound . 
That suit and Exxon 's countersuit were filed in a state court in Anchorage . 
Neither suit lists specific dollar claims , largely because damage assessment has n't yet been completed . 
Legal strategists say that damage claims against the oil giant and others could well exceed $ 1 billion . 
Litigation , if not settled out of court , could drag on for years . 
Exxon said in its suit that it will seek reimbursement from the state for that part of the cleanup costs and damage claims it says resulted from the state 's conduct . 
The oil company claims that Alaskan officials prevented Exxon from spraying dispersant onto the almost 11 million gallons of oil dumped when one of its tankers ran into an underwater reef . 
Craig Tillery , an Alaska assistant attorney general , said in an interview last night that Exxon 's accusations `` are not new . 
Exxon has made them before , at which point the state demonstrated they were untrue . 
The state will vigorously defend against any counterclaim . '' 
Since the spill last March , Exxon and the state have been wrangling over whether spraying dispersant on the oil in the first hours after the spill , when the weather was clear and calm , would have helped limit the environmental damage . 
Exxon claims that use of dispersants , which break an oil slick into microscopic droplets , was a crucial part of its immediate-response plan and that state officials banned their use during the two days of fair weather following the spill . 
The oil company claims that it had permission from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency prior to the spill to use dispersant during such an incident at the discretion of the U.S. Coast Guard . 
The state 's opposition to the use of dispersants , Exxon says , caused the Coast Guard `` to delay granting permission . '' 
Alaskan and Coast Guard officials say Exxon 's charges are n't relevant because tests conducted during the first two days following the spill showed that the dispersant was n't working anyway . 
Use of dispersants was approved when a test on the third day showed some positive results , officials said . 
Meson Investment Ltd. , a Vancouver , B.C.-based investment firm , said it raised its stake in Verit Industries to 8.9 % of the common shares outstanding . 
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing , Meson said it holds 67,400 Verit common shares , including net purchases of 8,100 shares bought from Oct. 10 , 1988 , to Oct. 11 , 1989 , for $ 3.875 to $ 7 each . 
Meson is the personal holding company of Steven Morfey , a Vancouver securities dealer . 
He said the transaction was made for investment purposes . 
Officials for Sun Valley , Calif.-based Verit could n't be reached for comment . 
In composite trading on the American Stock Exchange , Verit closed unchanged yesterday at $ 3.875 a share . 
The House Appropriations Committee approved an estimated $ 2.85 billion in emergency funding to assist California 's recovery from last week 's earthquake and to extend further aid to East Coast victims of Hurricane Hugo . 
The package was termed excessive by the Bush administration , but it also provoked a struggle with influential California lawmakers who sought unsuccessfully to add nearly $ 1 billion more and waive current restrictions to expedite the distribution of funds . 
By a 26-7 margin , the committee scuttled the more expensive alternative , and the debate forced a strained confrontation between Appropriations Committee Chairman Jamie Whitten ( D. , Miss . ) and his party 's largest state delegation in the House . 
`` I have no regrets about going forward , '' said Rep. Vic Fazio ( D. , Calif. ) , who sought later to play down the sometimes hostile tone of the long evening meeting . 
`` We are the Golden State , '' Mr. Fazio said , `` and there is a certain amount of jealousy . '' 
The $ 2.85 billion package incorporates $ 500 million for small-business loans , $ 1 billion in highway construction funds , and $ 1.35 billion divided between general emergency assistance and a reserve to be available to President Bush to meet unanticipated costs from the two disasters . 
The funding is attached to a stopgap bill to keep most of the government operating through Nov. 15 . 
The measure is expected to come before the House today , and Congress is under pressure to complete action before midnight EDT tomorrow , when the current continuing resolution expires . 
Given California 's size and political importance , the White House is eager to appear generous . 
But in private meetings yesterday , Budget Director Richard Darman argued that only $ 1.5 billion in new federal appropriations are needed to supplement existing resources . 
A White House budget office analysis estimates that $ 500 million -- or half the level in the committee bill -- is needed for highway assistance to meet California 's needs , and the administration rejects the notion that new appropriations are needed to finance disaster loans by the Small Business Administration . 
`` Everybody appreciates that it is a national disaster and that we 've got to address it , '' said Mr. Darman , who came to the Capitol to meet with Mr. Whitten and California lawmakers before the committee session . 
`` I would hope very much that we would n't end up in a kind of situation where you have a bidding war and then a veto threat . '' 
Although this White House pressure was clearly a factor among committee Republicans , no single influence was greater than Mr. Whitten . 
A master of pork-barrel politics , he had crafted the $ 2.85 billion package in vintage style and used the full force of his chairmanship to keep the proposal intact and dismiss any alternative . 
When Mr. Fazio offered the California-backed $ 3.84 billion plan , Mr. Whitten insisted that the full 14 pages be read aloud by the panel 's clerk to underscore the range of legislative changes also sought by the delegation . 
On the chairman 's motion , the California package was subsequently reduced to less-binding report language , and even when this was accepted as such on a voice vote , Mr. Whitten pointedly opposed it . 
More important than money in many cases are waivers California is seeking on current restrictions covering federal highway funds , such as a $ 100 million cap on how much any single state can receive in emergency funds in a year . 
Mr. Whitten 's package appears to accomplish this purpose , but the state faces more resistance in its bid for an extended waiver on having to put up any matching funds on repairs completed in the next six months . 
A member in the House leadership and skilled legislator , Mr. Fazio nonetheless found himself burdened not only by California 's needs but by Hurricane Hugo amendments he accepted in a vain effort to build support in the panel . 
The California Democrat appeared embarrassed by provisions inserted on behalf of owners of private beaches in the Virgin Islands , and lumber interests sought to add another $ 100 million in federal aid to plant timber on private land in North and South Carolina . 
California 's high-priced real estate puts it in an awkward position , too . 
One provision last night would have raised the cap on disaster loans to $ 500,000 from $ 100,000 per household to accommodate San Francisco losses . 
Kurzweil Music Systems Inc. said it retained Kidder , Peabody & Co. to study financial alternatives , including the possible sale of the financially struggling company . 
Kurzweil , Waltham , Mass. , makes digital electronic keyboard instruments used by professional recording musicians . 
It recently introduced a line for the home market . 
However , Raymond C. Kurzweil , chairman and chief executive , said `` The company continues to require additional funding to realize the potential of its technology . '' 
In the year 's first six months , Kurzweil had a loss of $ 6.9 million on sales of $ 11.2 million . 
Last month its president , John S. Donnelly , resigned citing `` management differences '' with Mr. Kurzweil . 
Amtech Systems Inc. , Tempe , Ariz. , said its preliminary year-end results of operations indicate `` substantial improvement '' over the previous fiscal year . 
Amtech , which makes an automated process system that improves the yields of semiconductor manufacturers , said profit for the year ended Sept. 30 rose to more than $ 800,000 from $ 446,000 last year . 
Per-share earnings are estimated at more than 40 cents , up from 22 cents for fiscal 1988 . 
Total revenue is expected to double to more than $ 22 million from $ 10.8 million . 
Amtech , which also provides technical temporary employment services to aerospace , defense , computer and high-tech companies in the Southwest and Baltimore-Washington areas , said its final audited results are due in late November . 
The company attributed the improvement to strong demand in the semiconductor equipment segment as well as the acquisition of Echelon Service Co. and the inclusion of a full year 's results of operations for RTS Inc. , compared with seven months ' results for the prior year . 
LDI Corp. , Cleveland , said it will offer $ 50 million in commercial paper backed by lease-rental receivables . 
The program matches funds raised from the sale of the commercial paper with small to medium-sized leases . 
LDI termed the paper `` non-recourse financing , '' meaning that investors would be repaid from the lease receivables , rather than directly by LDI Corp . 
LDI leases and sells data-processing , telecommunications and other high-tech equipment . 
SHEVARDNADZE ADMITTED that Moscow violated the 1972 ABM treaty . 
In a foreign-policy address before the Soviet legislature , the foreign minister conceded that the radar station in Krasnoyarsk breached the superpower Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty and said it would be dismantled . 
Shevardnadze said it took Gorbachev 's government four years to determine that the station 's location in Siberia violated the accord , as Western arms-control officials have long contended . 
He also denounced Moscow 's nine-year involvement in the war in Afghanistan , saying it involved `` gross violations of ... civil norms and ethics . '' 
Secretary of State Baker , in his first major arms-control speech , called for a new military relationship with Moscow to reduce `` first strike '' nuclear arms . 
BAY AREA COMMUTERS BATTLED earthquake-related transportation snarls . 
Travelers crowded into subways , sat in traffic jams on major freeways or waited for buses in the rain , but the massive gridlock anticipated by officials in the San Francisco Bay area never materialized . 
As the death toll from last week 's temblor climbed to 61 , the condition of freeway survivor Buck Helm , who spent four days trapped under rubble , improved , hospital officials said . 
Rescue crews , however , gave up hope that others would be found alive under the collapsed roadway . 
The House Appropriations Committee approved a $ 2.85 billion aid package for the quake region , less than the $ 3.8 billion sought by California officials . 
Hungary declared itself a democracy and for the first time openly commemorated the anniversary of the 1956 anti-Stalinist uprising that was crushed by the Soviet Union . 
A crowd estimated at 100,000 held a torch-lit march through Budapest as Acting President Szuros delivered a nationally televised address rejecting communist dominance . 
About 200,000 East Germans marched in Leipzig and thousands more staged protests in three other cities in a fresh challenge to the Communist leadership to introduce democratic freedoms . 
In an East Berlin suburb , meanwhile , employees at an electronics plant formed an independent trade union called Reform , a worker spokesman said . 
The space shuttle Atlantis landed at a desert air strip at Edwards Air Force Base , Calif. , ending a five-day mission that dispatched the Jupiter-bound Galileo space probe . 
The five astronauts returned to Earth about three hours early because high winds had been predicted at the landing site . 
Fog shrouded the base before touchdown . 
Explosions shook a Phillips Petroleum Co. plastics plant near Pasadena , Texas , hurling debris and causing a fire visible from 10 miles away . 
More than 100 people were injured , and a number of workers were missing . 
Parts of the Houston Ship Channel were closed . 
The White House said Bush is conferring with leaders of the Senate Intelligence Committee to ease differences over guidelines for CIA agents . 
The statement came after officials said Bush complained at a private meeting last week that a strict interpretation of a policy requires the U.S. to notify foreign dictators of certain coup plots . 
Lebanon 's Gen. Aoun placed Christian military forces on alert in case of renewed fighting with Syrian-backed Moslems after Lebanon 's two main Shiite militias rejected an Arab-sponsored peace accord . 
The plan , approved by lawmakers and rejected Sunday by Aoun , includes political changes aimed at ending the 14-year-old civil war . 
NATO defense ministers are expected to call for a reduction in nuclear forces in Europe when the alliance 's nuclear planning group convenes a two-day session today in Portugal . 
The ministers are to reshape NATO 's defenses in Western Europe amid fast-paced changes in the Soviet bloc . 
Iran 's President Rafsanjani offered to help gain freedom for Western hostages in Lebanon , but said the assistance was contingent on U.S. aid in resolving the cases of three Iranians kidnapped in Lebanon in 1982 or the release of frozen Iranian assets . 
Washington rejected the bid , saying the hostages were n't linked to other issues . 
PLO leader Arafat asked Egypt to seek clarifications from the U.S. on Secretary of State Baker 's plan for Mideast peace talks , an aide to Egyptian President Mubarak said . 
The official stressed that the PLO has n't rejected the five-point formula . 
Commonwealth leaders turned to issues ranging from drugs to the world economy after Zimbabwe 's President Mugabe called Thatcher 's views on South Africa `` despicable . '' 
At a meeting in Malaysia , Australia and Canada also assailed the British prime minister for criticizing the 49-nation group 's call for Pretoria to ease apartheid . 
CMS Enhancements Inc. said it estimates that sales and earnings for the fiscal first quarter ended Sept. 30 fell somewhat from the year-earlier period . 
Jim Farooquee , chief executive officer of the Tustin , Calif. , computer accessories supplier , said he was `` comfortable '' with analysts ' expectations that CMS would earn between six cents and eight cents a share on revenue of about $ 42 million . 
A year earlier , CMS posted profit of $ 1.1 million , or 13 cents a share , on sales of $ 48 million . 
This time , there are 30 % more shares outstanding . 
Mr. Farooquee attributed the decline to an industrywide softening of demand for computer enhancement products . 
Property Capital Trust said it dropped its plan to liquidate because it was n't able to realize the value it had expected . 
It said it will buy back two million shares , or 18.4 % , of the total outstanding , and continue operations buying and managing real estate . 
Property Capital , which is based in Boston , had told shareholders it expected to distribute at least $ 21 a share , or $ 229 million , in a liquidation , based on an expected asset sale price of $ 290 million or more . 
The company said it did n't receive an offer it wanted to accept . 
As a result of dropping the liquidation plan , shareholders will have to treat dividends received this year as ordinary income or capital gains rather than as tax free returns of capital , the company said . 
The share repurchase will be funded mostly from borrowings . 
A.H. Belo Corp. said its net income was $ 3.1 million , or 15 cents a share , in the third quarter , more than four times its profit of $ 663,000 , or three cents a share , last year . 
Included in the results was an adjustment to the Dallas-based company 's tax rate that reduced net income by about 10 cents a share , or approximately $ 2 million . 
Belo said it increased its effective tax rate to 52 % from 47 % to account for potential liabilities related to an Internal Revenue Service investigation of its tax returns for the years 1984 through 1988 . 
The newspaper and television owner said it expects the tax adjustment to reduce its net income for the full year by 14 cents , or approximately $ 2.8 million based on its 20.2 million shares outstanding . 
For the third quarter , Belo said its revenue increased 11 % , to $ 101.5 million from $ 91.2 million last year . 
For the nine months , the company had net income of $ 15.1 million , or 74 cents a share , up 98 % from $ 7.6 million , or 38 cents a share last year . 
Revenue grew almost 8 % to $ 301.9 million from $ 279.8 million last year . 
A federal judge granted a temporary stay of the California Student Aid Commission 's emergency action to stop guaranteeing loans for National Technical Schools , a unit of United Education & Software Inc . 
The California Student Aid Commission took the action Oct. 15 after a government audit cited National Technical Schools for having courses too short to be eligible for the educational loan program and having a student drop-out rate far in excess of federal standards , and it alleged other serious violations of law and regulations . 
United Education & Software , a Los Angeles education services company , called the commission 's action `` precipitous and unwarranted . '' 
The court set a hearing on the emergency action for Oct. 30 . 
United Education & Software posted a $ 250,000 bond against potential losses to the student aid commission and to taxpayers in guaranteeing any more loans for National Technical Schools students prior to the hearing . 
A decline in Allied-Signal Inc. 's automotive business contributed to flat sales and only slightly higher earnings in the third quarter . 
Allied-Signal reported that net rose 1.7 % to $ 121 million , or 81 cents a share , from $ 119 million , or 80 cents a share , the year earlier . 
Sales slipped 1.3 % to $ 2.82 billion from $ 2.86 billion . 
For the nine months , the Morris Township , N.J.-based company , with businesses in aerospace , automotive products and engineered materials , earned $ 413 million , or $ 2.77 cents a share , up 15 % from $ 359 million , or $ 2.40 a share . 
Sales eased 0.2 % to $ 8.88 billion from $ 8.90 billion . 
Chairman Edward L. Hennessy Jr. said that a drop in sales of auto and truck parts contributed to lower earnings in the automotive unit . 
He also cited unfavorable foreign-exchange rates and a lower tax rate . 
Earnings for the group declined to $ 11 million from $ 33 million last year . 
Earnings at Allied-Signal 's aerospace business rose to $ 55 million from $ 41 million a year ago , primarily on higher sales and profit in its engines and auxiliary power units . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Allied-Signal shares closed at $ 35.125 , off 87.5 cents . 
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said it will start enforcing stiffer regulations Jan. 31 for so-called gray-market imports of vehicles . 
The regulations , required under legislation enacted by Congress last year , will apply to imports of vehicles that were n't built to meet U.S. government auto safety standards and were intended for use in Europe or elsewhere abroad . 
U.S. officials estimated that gray-market imports total about 2,100 units a year , a small part of the more than three million vehicles exported to the U.S. each year . 
According to the NHTSA , the new regulations will prohibit anyone other than an importer that has registered with the U.S. government , or a person who has a contract with a registered importer , from permanently importing a vehicle that does n't meet the U.S. auto safety standards . 
The registered importer would be required to bring such vehicles into compliance with the U.S. safety standards , compared with the current situation in which anyone can bring in such vehicles and modify them to meet the U.S. standards . 
Congress tightened auto safety standards for gray-market imports after U.S. auto dealers , including franchised foreign-car dealers , complained that they often were blamed when the second and third buyers of such vehicles found that the cars could n't meet U.S. auto safety standards . 
Legent Corp. said it expects to report net income between $ 6.4 million and $ 6.9 million , or between 32 cents and 34 cents a share , for its fourth quarter ended Sept. 30 . 
In the year-ago quarter , the software developer reported pro forma earnings of $ 4.8 million , or 24 cents a share . 
Vienna , Va.-based Legent said it expects to post revenue for the quarter of more than $ 31 million , compared with pro forma revenue of $ 25.2 million in 1988 . 
For the fiscal year , the company said it anticipates reporting earnings of $ 23 million , or about $ 1.15 a share , including a charge of about $ 5.9 million , or 22 cents a share , related to the merger that created Legent out of Duquesne Systems Inc. and Morino Inc. in March 1989 . 
Revenue for fiscal 1989 is expected to exceed $ 124 million . 
Pro forma earnings for fiscal 1988 were $ 19.6 million , or 99 cents a share , on revenue of $ 97.2 million . 
The company attributed much of the growth in earnings to increased demand for its systems productivity software . 
Archive Corp. said it expects to report net income for its fiscal year ended Sept. 29 of a record $ 15 million , or $ 1.15 a share , up 43 % from $ 10.5 million , or 80 cents a share , for the prior year . 
The Costa Mesa , Calif. , maker of computer tape drives also projected record revenue for the year of $ 181 million , up from $ 122.7 million for the previous year . 
Archive attributed the gains to strong demand for its products , continued growth of the reseller market and the acquisition of Maynard Electronics in February , which accounted for about 14 % of the company 's revenue . 
Detrex Corp. said a reserve it is establishing to cover expected pollution cleanup costs at an Ohio plant reduced its third-quarter net income by $ 1.9 million . 
Detrex , which has annual sales of about $ 100 million , declined to say if it would post a loss in the third quarter . 
The Southfield , Mich.-based company earned $ 774,000 in the quarter last year . 
Detrex is setting aside $ 3.1 million for the cleanup , but said the reserve reduced its quarterly income by only $ 1.9 million because of tax considerations . 
In addition , the manufacturer said it signed a consent decree with Ohio to build a $ 1.4 million pollution-control facility at the Ashtabula chemical manufacturing plant by Aug. 1 , 1990 . 
Detrex said it is one of at least 17 companies notified by the Environmental Protection Agency that they may be potentially responsible for cleaning up the Fields Brook watershed near Detrex 's Ashtabula plant at a total cost the EPA estimates at $ 48 million -- a figure Detrex said the companies dispute . 
First Executive Corp. said about 96 % of the rights to purchase its depositary shares and warrants have been exercised . 
Of the 17.6 million rights units issued , just under 17 million were exercised before the Oct. 10 expiration of the offering , the insurance holding company said . 
Remaining units will be sold to the underwriters , Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and Kidder , Peabody & Co. , which will also purchase an over-allotment of 2.3 million additional units . 
First Executive said the offering will raise about $ 299 million -- minus underwriting fees and other expenses -- that the company plans to use to write new life insurance and annuity business . 
In addition , analysts have viewed the rights offering as a takeover defense that prospectively balloons the number of shares outstanding . 
Each of the units consists of two warrants , each of which could be used to purchase a half-share of common stock , and one depositary preference share . 
Depositary shares are convertible into common stock on a 1-to-1 basis . 
Currently , the company has about 88.1 million common shares outstanding . 
In over-the-counter trading Monday , the stock closed at $ 10.625 , off 37.5 cents . 
UNITED AIR 'S PARENT quashed any prospects for an immediate revival of the labor-management buy-out , saying UAL should remain independent for now . 
Also , UAL Chairman Stephen Wolf pulled out of the buy-out effort to focus on running the company . 
The two developments leave the airline with several problems , including an unsettled labor situation . 
Stock prices fell and bonds rose as worries mounted about the economy and the junk bond market . 
The Dow Jones industrials sank 26.23 points , to 2662.91 . 
The dollar also declined . 
The turmoil in junk bonds may last for years , investors and traders say . 
Even Drexel is pulling back . 
Santa Fe Pacific plans to sell 20 % of its large real estate unit to a California pension fund for $ 400 million and spin the rest off to shareholders . 
The proposal values the company 's real estate operation at $ 2 billion . 
Time Warner reported a $ 176 million loss for the third quarter , reflecting the cost of the recent merger and a method of accounting for the deal . 
Thrifts continued to shed assets in August , mainly to comply with stiffer capital rules under the S&L bailout law . 
Also , withdrawals exceeded deposits by $ 5.1 billion in the month . 
Exxon 's profit fell 9 % in the third quarter , hurt by sagging results at two of its three main businesses . 
Phillips and Arco posted declines . 
Ashland had a loss . 
Amerada Hess and Occidental Petroleum had gains . 
Ogilvy 's chairman , Kenneth Roman , is leaving to take a top post at American Express . 
His resignation follows a hostile takeover of the ad agency in May by WPP of Britain . 
The Justice Department took steps that could restrict the use by prosecutors of criminal racketeering charges against white-collar defendants . 
Shearson was sued by money manager George Soros , who claimed one of his funds was defrauded out of $ 60 million during stock-index futures trading just after the 1987 crash . 
Drexel 's efforts to settle its legal troubles are being resisted by at least 10 states . 
Some may try to revoke the firm 's license to sell securities . 
Prime Computer plans to dismiss 20 % of its work force to cut costs following its recent leveraged buy-out . 
The action renews concern about buyouts in high-tech industries . 
Paribas plans a bid for another big French financial and industrial firm , Navigation Mixte , a sign Europe 's takeover fever has n't cooled . 
Qintex Australia unveiled plans to restructure and sell assets to try to ease its financial problems . 
Union Carbide 's earnings plunged 35 % in the third quarter , reflecting weakness in the company 's core chemicals and plastics businesses . 
Japan 's Daiwa Securities named Masahiro Dozen president . 
The rapid advance of the 52-year-old executive surprised many at the company . 
Markets -- 
Stocks : Volume 135,860,000 shares . 
Dow Jones industrials 2662.91 , off 26.23 ; transportation 1236.66 , up 5.86 ; utilities 215.35 , off 0.13 . 
Bonds : Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3411.08 , up 
Commodities : Dow Jones futures index 129.49 , off 0.13 ; spot index 131.64 , up 0.30 . 
Dollar : 141.90 yen , off 0.53 ; 1.8470 marks , off 0.0108 . 
The Justice Department has revised certain internal guidelines and clarified others in a move that could restrict the use of criminal racketeering charges against white-collar defendants . 
The most significant changes in department policy are new requirements that federal prosecutors avoid disrupting `` the normal business functions '' of companies charged under the racketeering law , a senior department official said . 
Another important revision of department policy is a new guideline warning prosecutors `` not to take steps that would harm innocent third parties '' in a case brought under the racketeering law , the official , David Runkel , said . 
The department distributed the revisions and clarifications to U.S. attorneys around the country this summer as part of a routine process of updating prosecutorial guidelines , Mr. Runkel said . 
The changes apply to prosecutions brought under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law . 
Under that law , defendants who allegedly commit a pattern of crimes by means of a `` criminal enterprise '' may be charged with racketeering and forced to forfeit the proceeds of the enterprise . 
The RICO law has come under criticism from some defendants and defense lawyers . 
They argue that the rights of RICO defendants and third parties not named in RICO indictments have been unfairly damaged . 
The department 's most significant clarification of existing RICO policy is a directive to prosecutors that they should seek to seize assets from defendants `` in proportion '' to the nature of the alleged offense , Mr. Runkel said . 
`` That means that if the offense deals with one part of the business , you do n't attempt to seize the whole business ; you attempt to seize assets related to the crime , '' he explained . 
In general , the thrust of the department 's directive is to encourage prosecutors to limit pretrial asset seizures if there are less intrusive means of protecting assets the government may subsequently be able to seize after a conviction , Mr. Runkel said . 
It was the kind of snubbing rarely seen within the Congress , let alone within the same party . 
Sen. Alan Cranston trekked over to the House side of Capitol Hill a few days ago and volunteered his testimony to fellow Democrat Rep. Henry Gonzalez . 
It was offered as an expression of cooperation to Mr. Gonzalez , who is investigating the $ 2.5 billion failure of Lincoln Savings & Loan Association . 
But instead of thanks , Sen. Cranston was treated with cool formality . 
`` Every witness receives a formal subpoena , '' Rep. Gonzalez told him . 
Seldom have House hearings caused so much apprehension in the Senate , where California Sen. Cranston and four other senators were already writhing in the glare of unfavorable publicity over the alleged looting of Lincoln by their friend and political benefactor , Charles Keating Jr. , principal stockholder of Lincoln 's parent company , American Continental Corp. of Phoenix , Ariz . 
At the first day of the House Banking Committee 's hearings last week , William Seidman , chairman of the Resolution Trust Corp. , the federal agency created to sell sick thrifts , said the agency is investigating whether Lincoln made illegal political contributions . 
Mr. Keating arranged nearly $ 1 million in donations to Sen. Cranston and his various political causes , and hundreds of thousands more to other lawmakers . 
Future witnesses include a former federal S&L regulator who has accused the five senators of attempting to `` subvert '' the regulatory process by intervening on behalf of Mr. Keating . 
Unlike many lawmakers , Chairman Gonzalez says he considers intervening with regulators to be improper . 
`` When you reach a point where a policy-making body is trying to shape administrative decisions , then that 's a no-no in my book , '' the Texas lawmaker says . 
And he has attached himself to the Lincoln story tenaciously . 
`` Unless the questions are answered , I will keep on going . '' 
Lawmakers often are reluctant to embarrass colleagues , even those of opposing political parties . 
In the recent Housing and Urban Development Department scandal , for example , Rep. Thomas Lantos , the California Democrat who led the hearings , tiptoed through embarrassing disclosures about HUD grants secured by Sen. Alfonse D'Amato , a New York Republican . 
But Chairman Gonzalez is a genuine maverick . 
He comes from the same political line as Wright Patman , a bank-baiting Texas populist who chaired the Banking Committee until 1974 . 
Mr. Gonzalez is also a stickler for ethical standards who refuses to accept honorariums and who believes in conducting official business in the open . 
Early in his political career , as a city councilman in San Antonio , he walked out of a meeting when political supporters asked that the police chief be replaced , denouncing the closed-door affair publicly as a `` bat-roost meeting . '' 
The immediate target of Rep. Gonzalez 's inquiry is Danny Wall , chairman of the Office of Thrift Supervision . 
As the principal regulator of the thrift industry , Mr. Wall delayed seizing Lincoln S&L for more than two years after his staff told him that the California thrift was insolvent and that potential losses to taxpayers were growing rapidly . 
Rep. Gonzalez seems primed to lash out at Mr. Wall when hearings resume Thursday with testimony by two federal regulators from San Francisco , William Black and Mike Patriarca . 
Mr. Wall relieved them of responsibility for supervising Lincoln in 1988 . 
Mr. Gonzalez expressed concern over a report that the two had been summoned to Washington by Mr. Wall last week to discuss their testimony in advance . 
`` I think he is trying to improperly influence a witness , and by God I 'm not going to tolerate it , '' he says . 
Mr. Wall , however , is a self-proclaimed `` child of the Senate '' and former staff director of its Banking Committee . 
An inquiry into his handling of Lincoln S&L inevitably will drag in Sen. Cranston and the four others , Sens. Dennis DeConcini ( D. , Ariz. ) , John McCain ( R. , Ariz. ) , John Glenn ( D. , Ohio ) and Donald Riegle ( D. , Mich . ) . 
They all attended a meeting in April 1987 questioning why a federal audit of Lincoln S&L had dragged on for two years . 
`` I 'm certain that in the course of the hearings the names { of the senators } will be brought out , '' Mr. Gonzalez says . 
This is raising eyebrows . 
`` When I first got a glimpse at the witness list , I could n't believe that they were going to go ahead and do this , '' says Michael Waldman , director of Congress Watch , a consumer group . 
`` There are some witnesses who will be forced to testify about their meetings with senators . '' 
And a Democratic aide to a Banking Committee member remarks , `` I too am astounded by it , because Gonzalez has certainly placed a lot of Democratic senators in a very bad position . '' 
All the senators say they merely were trying to ensure fairness for a constituent . 
Mr. Keating lives in Phoenix , and the California thrift 's parent is an Ohio-chartered corporation with holdings in Michigan . 
Chairman Gonzalez expresses sympathy for Sen. Riegle , his counterpart as chairman of the Senate Banking Committee . 
`` He 's wise , he 's good and I know he 's an honest man , '' the Texan says . 
But at the same time , Mr. Gonzalez has n't forgotten a confrontation over Mr. Wall during House-Senate negotiations over S&L bailout legislation during the summer . 
The Senate negotiators included Sens. Cranston and Riegle and Mr. Wall 's principal sponsor , Republican Sen. Jake Garn of Utah . 
They were willing to trade important provisions in the bailout legislation to preserve Mr. Wall 's job and to avoid a reconfirmation hearing in which he would be called upon to testify about Lincoln S&L . 
Most importantly , the Senate traded away the Bush administration 's controversial plan to finance the bailout , which was partly reinstated later . 
At the time , Mr. Gonzalez said several senators told him that they `` could get some roadblocks out of the way if there could be some understanding on Garn 's insistence on Wall . '' 
Now Mr. Gonzalez is holding the equivalent of reconfirmation hearings anyway , under the guise of the Lincoln investigation . 
`` In a way , that 's what this is , '' Mr. Gonzalez concedes . 
Even some House Banking Committee members could suffer from the fallout . 
Mr. Keating raised $ 20,000 for Rep. Doug Barnard 's 1986 re-election campaign while the Georgia Democrat was taking his side against regulators who wanted to curb risky investments and wholesale deposit brokering . 
He recently voted `` present '' when the committee authorized a subpoena to compel Mr. Keating to testify , then changed his vote to yes . 
But the chairman 's supporters have the upper hand as federal regulators press a $ 1.1 billion fraud suit against Mr. Keating and others . 
Rep. Jim Leach ( R. , Iowa ) says the Lincoln S&L affair is `` the biggest bank heist in history , '' and adds : `` The great question that remains to be resolved is whether we have a congressional Watergate in the making . '' 
A witness set to testify on Thursday was quoted in a news report over the weekend as saying Lincoln `` laundered '' campaign contributions illegally . 
But the witness , William Crawford , California 's chief state thrift regulator , denies saying that . 
`` I do n't know whether it was done properly or not , because I 'm not a lawyer , '' he said in a telephone interview yesterday . 
But he said he is prepared to testify that executives of Lincoln and its parent corporation got unusually high salaries and frequent calls directing them to make specific contributions . 
The committee also has summoned Mr. Wall 's predecessor , Edwin Gray . 
He has characterized the five senators ' roles as `` tantamount to an attempt to subvert the ... regulatory process , '' and he is n't expected to back down even though the five senators have disputed his account of a 1987 meeting . 
So the senators must brace themselves . 
Sen. Cranston , as he returned to the capital last week from a one-day trip to inspect earthquake damage in San Francisco , sighed to an aide : `` Well , back to Keatingland . 
When Anne Volokh and her family immigrated to the U.S. 14 years ago , they started life in Los Angeles with only $ 400 . 
They 'd actually left the Soviet Union with $ 480 , but during a stop in Italy Ms. Volokh dropped $ 80 on a black velvet suit . 
Not surprisingly , she quickly adapted to the American way . 
Three months after she arrived in L.A. she spent $ 120 she did n't have for a hat . 
( `` A turban , '' she specifies , `` though it was n't the time for that 14 years ago . 
But I loved turbans . '' ) 
Since then she has become wealthy . 
Her husband and older son -- a computer prodigy profiled in The Wall Street Journal in 1981 , when he was 13 -- run a software company with expected sales this year of $ 10 million . 
Most recently , she has become the publisher of Movieline , a four-year-old Los Angeles magazine that began national distribution last month , with an initial press run of 100,000 copies . 
Distributed by the Hearst Corp. 's Eastern News , the glossy publication melds Vanity Fair 's gossipy archness and Premiere 's earnest delving into behind-the-scenes minutiae , with a special emphasis on Tinseltown as fashion trendsetter . 
It 's being sold through bookstores , newsstands and some video stores . 
Though Ms. Volokh is a small woman , she has an outsized personality and dramatic flair that seem perfectly suited to capitalism as it is practiced in Hollywood . 
Certainly life for her has changed considerably since the days in Kiev , when she lived with her parents , her husband and her two sons in a 2 1 / 2-room apartment in what she calls `` silent internal immigration , '' dreaming of escape . 
Now , for example , she owns 48 hats . 
However , she remembers the lean years and recalls with relish wearing her first major American purchase -- that turban 10 years later and having a Los Angeles boutique owner ask her if it was a Chanel . 
With obvious satisfaction , she says she told him : `` No darling , I just give it a Chanel look . '' 
She keeps track of the rest of her hats by stapling Polaroid snapshots to the outside of each hatbox . 
Are the hats merely part of her new L.A. persona , along with the many ultra-thin Capri cigarettes she smokes , the parties she throws for 500 people , the Chekovian feasts she offers guests at her weekend place in Santa Barbara ? 
`` No , darling , '' she said recently in her fluent , slightly affected English , during a trip East to promote Movieline 's national expansion . 
`` You have to be born with it . 
I used to wear hats in Russia , but I had to make them and my dresses . 
On the hat side I was n't getting what I wanted . '' 
Now 48 years old , Ms. Volokh has definite ideas about what she wants . 
At Movieline , she wants `` specific paragraphing , specific tone , a specific attitude -- bright and bold and tongue-in-cheek . '' 
In restaurants ( in this case , the Russian Samovar , a New York restaurant operated by and for Soviet emigres ) , she did n't want the chirpy , folkish music bouncing through the room . 
`` You people here think this is Russian music , '' she said with disdain , and called over to the waitress : `` Could you turn it off ? '' 
That done , Ms. Volokh spoke with rampant eloquence about the many attributes she feels she was born with : an understanding of food , business , Russian culture , human nature , and parties . 
`` Parties are rather a state of mind , '' she said , pausing only to taste and pass judgment on the Georgian shashlik ( `` a little well done , but very good '' ) . 
`` If you are born to give parties , you give parties . 
Even in Russia we managed to give parties . 
In Los Angeles , in our lean years , we gave parties . '' 
As publisher of a magazine devoted to movies as guideposts for fashion and other fantasies , Ms. Volokh sees her party-giving as an important part of business . 
She has thrown extravagant soirees for crowds of people , but prefers more intimate gatherings . 
`` At American cocktail parties everyone 's always looking over your shoulder to see who they can talk to next . 
I like rather tea , because it is at the end of the day . '' 
She serves high Russian tea , at 5 p.m . 
`` It 's supposed to be later but I just moved it . 
In Los Angeles , it 's important to catch people just after work . '' 
She also frequently invites directors , producers , actors , writers and other show business people for `` coffee and clips in the pleasure dome . '' 
Guests bring movies on tape , and show their favorite three-to-five minute segments on the screen that unrolls from the ceiling of the Volokhs ' art-nouveau library ( `` the pleasure dome '' ) . 
They eat `` sinful and sensual things '' -- and explain their clips . 
`` It 's very revealing and soul baring , '' said Ms. Volokh . 
The idea for Movieline actually was dreamed up by an old friend of the Volokhs , Boris Krutchensky ( who has the title of co-publisher ) , and Laurie Halpern Smith , now the magazine 's co-editor . 
Mr. Krutchensky approached Ms. Volokh five years ago about backing the publication , which started out as a listing guide . 
She was interested only if she could guide it editorially as well . 
`` Anne does n't believe in blandness , '' said Ms. Smith . 
`` She wants things to be exciting . 
And she has this inexhaustible energy . 
She 'll think of an idea the editorial people think is impossible , then she 'll have us make it work . '' 
In fact , Ms. Volokh was n't just a rich lady who needed a hobby . 
Back in the Soviet Union she was a respected journalist , writing a weekly column about the national cuisine for Sunday Izvestia . 
Those columns -- vivid discussions of the cultural and literary reverberations of food as well as practical advice on how to glamorize dreary Sovietized meals -- became the basis for her erudite and entertaining cookbook , `` The Art of Russian Cuisine , '' brought out in 1983 by Macmillan Publishing Co . 
`` I do n't trust people who do n't eat , '' said Ms. Volokh , though she herself stopped eating lunch a few years ago to drop 25 pounds . 
`` Look at Dostoevski and Kafka . 
No one ever eats in their books and look at them ... . 
Tolstoy 's characters eat , Pushkin 's , Gogol 's . '' 
In her cookbook , which Macmillan is bringing out in soft cover this month ( with the blini recipe revised so it works ) , she introduces each chapter with appropriate quotations from Russian literature : Pushkin on blini , Goncharov on piroghi . 
In life , she offers practical dieting advice : `` Divide your meals into important and unimportant . 
In a great restaurant , do n't deprive yourself . 
The other meals do n't matter . '' 
Amusing as she is , and frivolous as she can seem , this is a serious person with some difficult memories . 
She was the child of relative privilege . 
Her mother was a translator ; her father was `` the eternal vice director . '' 
`` I emigrated to wear better hats , do better parties , '' she said with a giggle . 
`` But we should n't leave out political reasons , number one . 
You try to maintain your dignity under difficult circumstances . 
One can not imagine how you live when you live those double and triple lives . '' 
By 1973 , after their second child was born , it had become clear to Ms. Volokh and her husband Vladimir , a computer scientist , that they wanted to leave the U.S.S.R . 
Ms. Volokh quit her job , to remove herself from the public eye . 
The wait was miserable . 
Before granting Ms. Volokh 's parents a visa , the government required her mother to obtain permission from her first husband , whom she had divorced 38 years earlier . 
Mr. Volokh was fired from his job , and had to endure hours of organized verbal abuse from his co-workers , accusations of sabotage and counterrevolutionary activities . 
The Volokhs were afraid that they 'd end up like a friend of theirs who 'd applied for a visa and waited for 10 years , having been demoted from his profession of theoretical mathematician to shipping clerk . 
They did n't . 
Their visa came in relatively short order , and they moved to Los Angeles . 
Mr. Volokh soon found work in his field , but Ms. Volokh refused the obvious and available occupation - as translator for a Russian who spoke fluent English . 
`` That 's always looking back , '' she said . 
`` I wanted to be in business . '' 
On the way to that goal , she received her first U.S. paycheck for proofreading a book of Polish poetry , attended secretarial school , then went to work for a fund-raising organization . 
Soon she was running the office . 
When her husband and son founded their computer company , Vesoft , she worked as business manager , bookkeeper and publicist . 
Now Movieline is located in the same building as Vesoft . 
`` Things work out unexpectedly in life , '' said Ms. Volokh . 
`` You never know if you 'll be chosen to be the scapegoat or the lucky one . 
We were lucky . 
William D. Forrester , president of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Trade and Economic Council , has a warning for U.S. companies trying to do business in the Soviet Union . 
`` It 's an extremely complex market , and you have to be prepared to make a big commitment , '' Mr. Forrester says . 
`` We are not trying to encourage everyone . '' 
Undeterred by such words of caution , corporate America is flocking to Moscow , lured by a huge untapped market and Mikhail Gorbachev 's attempt to overhaul the Soviet economy . 
Doing business with the Russians , once the pursuit of a handful of hardened veterans , has become the goal of such major companies as General Motors Corp. , Federal Express Corp. and Procter & Gamble Co. , as well as a cluster of smaller firms . 
Reflecting the new-found interest , more than 140 U.S. companies are taking part in a Moscow exhibition organized by Mr. Forrester 's trade group . 
But while U.S. interest may be big and growing , the difficulties that have stymied deals in the past show no sign of abating . 
Alongside the old problems of a non-convertible currency and an inpenetrable bureaucracy , Western business executives must now grapple with new complexities linked to perestroika , the restructuring of the Soviet economy . 
Executives say Mr. Gorbachev 's moves to break up the government 's foreign trade monopoly have created uncertainties as well as opportunities . 
Changing legislation has opened the field to thousands of inexperienced Soviet players , many who promise more than they can deliver . 
And some foreign firms are finding that even when they manage to overcome such hurdles , their ventures now have to be endorsed by such unpredictable bodies as the Soviet parliament and the governments of the nation 's republics . 
`` You have to go out to all your constituents , '' says James H. Giffen , who is spearheading the most ambitious attempt by U.S. firms to break into the Soviet market , involving investment of more than $ 5 billion in some two dozen joint ventures . 
As part of that attempt , by the American Trade Consortium , Mr. Giffen says he spends a lot of time lobbying . 
Growing public fears about the Soviet environment is one new factor affecting some joint-venture plans . 
Over the past two years , Soviet ministries have been talking to international firms , including Occidental Petroleum Co. and Combustion Engineering Inc. of the U.S. , Montedison S.p.A. of Italy and several Japanese groups , about jointly building and operating several big petrochemical plants . 
The plans have come under fire from Soviet environmentalists , and officials say many are likely to be scaled back or dropped . 
Whatever the difficulties , Mr. Gorbachev remains committed to increasing foreign trade . 
For political as well as economic reasons , U.S. companies are at the top of his priorities -- a point he underscored by spending two hours walking around the U.S. trade show last week . 
Talking to a small group of U.S. executives afterwards , Mr. Gorbachev appeared impatient for a big expansion in U.S.-Soviet trade , which now amounts to a meager $ 3 billion annually . 
The U.S. ranks fourth of countries that have concluded joint ventures , behind West Germany , Finland and Italy . 
According to several people present at the meeting , Mr. Gorbachev also supported the idea of concluding several commercial accords with the U.S. , possibly at his next summit meeting with President Bush . 
Judging by the crush at the exhibition , deprived Soviet consumers are more than ready for U.S. products . 
Hundreds of people lined up every day at the Colgate-Palmolive Co. stand to receive a free tube of toothpaste , a commodity in chronically short supply here . 
And unruly crowds at RJR Nabisco Inc. 's booth almost knocked over a glass showcase in the rush to get a free Camel cigarette sticker . 
Some U.S. products are filtering into the Soviet market under an emergency import program . 
Both Colgate and Procter & Gamble have received big orders for toothpaste , soap and detergents . 
The American Trade Consortium says it is planning to ship some $ 500 million of consumer goods , financed by bank credits , in the first few months of next year . 
But the current Soviet purchasing spree may be a one-time affair . 
The goal of most U.S. firms -- joint ventures -- remains elusive . 
Because the Soviet ruble is n't convertible into dollars , marks and other Western currencies , companies that hope to set up production facilities here must either export some of the goods to earn hard currency or find Soviet goods they can take in a counter-trade transaction . 
International competition for the few Soviet goods that can be sold on world markets is heating up , however . 
Shelley M. Zeiger , an entrepreneur from New Jersey who buys Soviet porcelain and `` matryoshka '' nesting dolls for export to the U.S. , says West German companies already have snapped up much of the production of these items . 
Seeking to overcome the currency problems , Mr. Giffen 's American Trade Consortium , which comprises Chevron Corp. , RJR , Johnson & Johnson , Eastman Kodak Co. , and Archer-Daniels-Midland Co. , has concocted an elaborate scheme to share out dollar earnings , largely from the revenues of a planned Chevron oil project . 
Several medical concerns , including Pfizer Inc. , Hewlett-Packard Co. , Colgate and Abbott Laboratories intend to pursue a similar consortium approach . 
`` It 's hard to invest capital here on the same basis as investing in other countries , '' says Dennis A. Sokol , president of Medical Service Partners Inc. , who is putting the medical consortium together . 
Some U.S. entrepreneurs operate on a smaller scale . 
One group seeks to publish a U.S.-Soviet medical journal in conjunction with the U.S.S.R. Ministry of Health . 
According to Richard P. Mills , a Boston-based official of the U.S. partner , 10,000 copies of the quarterly will be printed in Russian from next year . 
It will be financed by advertisements from U.S. companies and by simultaneous publication of an English-language journal containing details of Soviet medical advancements . 
`` We found a market niche , '' Mr. Mills boasts . 
`` It 's truly entrepreneurial . 
General Electric Co. was given an $ 89.6 million Navy contract for nuclear propulsion parts . 
Westinghouse Electric Corp. also won a $ 75.5 million Navy contract for nuclear propulsion parts . 
Federal Data Corp. was issued a $ 14.5 million Navy contract for computer systems . 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. was awarded an $ 11.5 million Navy contract for oceanographic services . 
Cray Research Inc. said it sold one of its newest and largest computer systems , the Cray Y-MP / 832 , to the United Kingdom Meteorological Office . 
The system is the first to be sold through the joint marketing agreement between Cray and Control Data Corp . 
The supercomputer , which lists for $ 18.5 million , will be installed in the first quarter of 1990 in the meteorological office 's headquarters in Bracknell , England . 
Shareholders of Nuovo Banco Ambrosiano S.p.A. voted to accept a bid of 5,500 lire ( $ 4.03 ) a share by France 's Credit Agricole for 13.32 % of the bank , rejecting an earlier , equal offer by Italy 's Assicurazioni Generali S.p.A . 
The move will give Nuovo Banco a badly needed foreign presence , and make Credit Agricole the bank 's largest shareholder . 
It also opens a rift in the bank 's shareholders ' syndicate that could lead to a battle for control of the concern . 
Nuovo Banco will become Italy 's biggest private-sector bank when it completes its scheduled merger with Banca Cattolica del Venetoen by year end . 
Credit Agricole asked a Milan court to sequester the Nuovo Banco shares , the Italian news agency ANSA reported . 
The tribunal is scheduled to rule on the request Friday . 
No reason for the request was given . 
Credit Agricole officials could n't be immediately reached for comment . 
The decision to accept Credit Agricole 's bid , valued at 283.3 billion lire ( $ 207.4 million ) , came after a stormy weekend meeting . 
Nuovo Banco 's second largest shareholder , the Fiat S.p.A.-controlled investment concern , Gemina S.p.A. , fought to have Generali 's offer approved . 
Gemina , which owns 13.26 % of Nuovo Banco , abstained in the final vote on Credit Agricole , which was nonetheless approved by a majority of shareholders . 
The linkup with Credit Agricole will give Nuovo Banco its first foreign presence since it was formed from the wreck of the old Banco Ambrosiano , which collapsed amid scandal after the death of Chairman Roberto Calvi in 1982 . 
Since then , the bank has strengthened its Italian network , and has posted strong results . 
`` The shareholders felt we needed a foreign presence more than we needed links with an insurance company , '' an Ambrosiano spokeswoman said . 
Gemina said in a statement that `` it reserves the right to take any action to protect its rights as a member of the syndicate . '' 
A company spokeswoman said the company had n't decided what measures to take , but did n't rule out legal action . 
Generali , Italy 's biggest insurer , last month offered 5,500 lire a share for the Nuovo Banco stake held by Banco Popolare di Milano , the bank 's largest shareholder , which announced plans to sell the holdings earlier this year . 
A Generali spokesman declined to comment on Nuovo Banco 's rejection of the insurer 's offer . 
On the Milan stock exchange , Nuovo Banco 's shares jumped to 4,830 lire each from 4,695 lire Friday . 
Qintex Australia Ltd. , a media and resorts concern controlled by Australian entrepreneur Christopher Skase , announced a plan to restructure and sell assets to try to ease its financial problems . 
Mr. Skase , a 41-year-old former newspaper reporter who chairs the company , said in a statement that Qintex will sell its 51 % stake in its upscale Mirage resorts in Australia and Hawaii as well as three Australian television stations . 
The sales are expected to raise more than 600 million Australian dollars ( US$ 462.2 million ) , Mr. Skase said . 
Qintex Australia has n't disclosed its borrowings , but analysts estimate the company 's debt at A$ 1.2 billion . 
Mr. Skase also said the restructuring plan calls for the merger of Qintex Australia with Qintex Ltd. , which owns 55 % of Qintex Australia . 
He said the move will `` significantly reduce administrative and operating costs , '' but he did n't provide details of the merger . 
Company officials said over the weekend that Qintex Australia 's bank creditors have become concerned about a barrage of bad news at the company , including a failed US$ 1.5 billion plan to buy MGM / UA Communications Co. , a Beverly Hills , Calif. , movie and television production concern . 
Friday , Qintex Entertainment Inc. , a 43%-owned U.S. affiliate , filed for protection from creditor lawsuits under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code . 
Analysts predicted that the move would further shake creditor confidence in Qintex Australia and force it to sell assets . 
The company 's latest moves were disclosed after the Australian Stock Exchange suspended trading in shares of Qintex Australia and Qintex Ltd. because the companies had n't answered an exchange inquiry about the extent of their loans , investments and deposits at Qintex Entertainment . 
Mr. Skase 's statement was addressed to the stock exchange and appeared to be a response to the inquiry . 
It said Qintex Entertainment owes Qintex Australia US$ 38.1 million in loans not secured by specific assets . 
Qintex Australia also said it has an investment of A$ 83.3 million in Qintex Entertainment shares . 
In the statement , Mr. Skase said that on the basis of current interest rates in Australia , the company 's asset sales would reduce interest expense by about A$ 120 million a year in addition to eliminating certain liabilities . 
In March , Qintex sold 49 % of the three Mirage resorts to Japan 's Nippon Shinpan Co. and Mitsui & Co. for A$ 433 million . 
Yesterday 's statement did n't say whether the Japanese companies will acquire Qintex 's remaining stake in the resorts . 
Before its shares were suspended from trading , Qintex Australia plunged to 16 Australian cents ( 12 U.S. cents ) a share yesterday from 33 Australian cents Friday . 
The shares traded at about A$ 1.50 in March , when the plan to acquire MGM / UA was announced . 
Qintex Ltd. shares sank to A$ 1.50 yesterday from A$ 3.05 Friday . 
Mr. Skase 's statement cited four recent problems that he said had cut group cash flow by more than A$ 200 million . 
They were what he called an `` unlawful termination '' by MGM / UA of the acquisition agreement with Qintex , high Australian interest rates , a pilots ' strike at Australian domestic airlines that cut revenue at the company 's Australian resorts and delays in completing a sale of two regional TV stations in Queensland state . 
MGM / UA has sued Qintex Australia for breach of contract and fraud over the collapsed acquisition agreement , and Qintex Australia has threatened a countersuit . 
Qintex Australia has n't yet reported results for the fiscal year ended July 31 . 
In his statement , Mr. Skase said preliminary accounts showed that group profit before interest , tax and depreciation `` will exceed A$ 170 million . '' 
He gave no further details . 
Shareholders ' funds as of July 31 were estimated at more than A$ 1 billion , Mr. Skase said , compared with A$ 725 million a year earlier . 
The company will make `` adequate provisions '' to cover costs of the dispute with MGM / UA and any loss from the investment in Qintex Entertainment , he said . 
Mr. Skase also disclosed a disagreement among directors of Qintex Australia over certain fees claimed by Qintex Group Management Services Pty. , a management-services concern in which Qintex Australia executives have an interest . 
Qintex Australia paid the management company A$ 32.6 million in the latest fiscal year . 
Mr. Skase said most of the money went to other parties for expenses such as rent and travel , but a smaller portion is owed to senior executives and others for management services . 
Non-executive directors of Qintex Australia , who must approve payments to the senior executives , balked at the amount . 
Two of the directors resigned , Mr. Skase said , so the payments have n't yet been approved . 
Chip 's Memory Is Here Today , Here Tomorrow 
TWO COMPANIES plan to market a new chip with ceramic circuits that store data even when the power is off . 
Today 's most widely used data-storing chips have `` volatile '' memories -- their data disappear if they are n't fed a steady diet of electricity , so they need external power supplies . 
National Semiconductor Corp. and a start-up named Ramtron Corp. plan to start shipping so-called ferroelectric memories , which can remember data for at least 10 years without any current flowing to them . 
The chips use materials , such as lead zirconate titanate , to form microscopic switches that retain their data without electricity . 
Developers caution that broad applications are several years away because the technology is n't fully refined . 
But Ramtron of Colorado Springs , Colo. , plans to start shipping commercial quantities of simple ferroelectric chips in December . 
The company expects the chips eventually to be used in devices that mimic a whole range of computer memory equipment , including floppy-disk and hard-disk drives . 
National Semiconductor is getting ferroelectric technology from Krysalis Corp. in Albuquerque , N.M . 
National says it agreed to acquire Krysalis 's assets and will start shipping commercial quantities of its first chips , including a 4-kilobit memory , next year . 
Once production hurdles are overcome , the chips could take over a significant part of the market . 
In addition to not needing an outside power source , they are potentially cheaper to make because they require fewer manufacturing steps than conventional chips . 
Military buyers have shown interest , National says , because ferroelectric chips resist atomic radiation . 
And while today 's non-volatile chips -- such as electronically erasable programmable read-only memory chips -- ca n't be used in a computer 's central memory because they `` learn '' data slowly , ferroelectric chips accept data at very high speeds . 
Showing Up in Court Without Being There 
AN AUSTIN , Texas , company plans to make it easy for you show up in court a thousand miles away without leaving town . 
Witnesses often must travel long distances to give face-to-face depositions before lawyers and court reporters . 
That means huge travel bills . 
And telephone or videotape depositions just do n't match physical encounters . 
That could change , thanks to lower long-distance rates and cheaper electronics . 
Video Telecom Corp. , which markets videoconferencing systems , is working with court reporters to wire a nationwide network to allow depositions by live television . 
The company installed a prototype system that connects Dallas with Miami over digital phone lines . 
And it is preparing to set up shop in Chicago , New York and 10 other cities where court-reporting agencies can tie conference rooms into the network . 
While lawyers arranged individual tie-ups before , the formal network of court reporters should make things easier and cheaper . 
An attorney will be able to use the network for an hourly fee of between $ 200 and $ 400 , depending on the quality of the picture , to take depositions from witnesses in any of the connected cities . 
Japanese Reverse Tack On Patent Protection 
JAPAN 'S MISUSE of U.S. patents has been a sore point for American chip makers . 
Now at least one Japanese company is turning the courtroom tables . 
Until now , most Japanese charges have been responses to suits against them . 
But last year Hitachi Ltd. surprised Japan 's electronics industry when it accused Korea 's Samsung Electronics Co. of using Hitachi technology to make dynamic random-access memory chips . 
( A settlement was reached but was n't made public . ) 
And Hitachi went on the offensive against the U.S. 's Motorola Inc. earlier this month with a suit charging that Motorola 's new MC88200 chip infringes on a Hitachi patent . 
Another recent Hitachi suit accuses Motorola of reverse engineering a Hitachi technology -- a turnabout from a nation of champion reverse engineers . 
The moves illustrate the more aggressive attitude toward patent protection that patent experts say Japan is starting to take . 
Hitachi made the reverse-engineering charges in an amendment to a counterclaim filed in a federal district court in Texas after Motorola sued Hitachi for patent violation . 
Hitachi charges Motorola `` has engaged in fraudulent and inequitable conduct in the procurement of certain Motorola patents '' used in Motorola 's MC68030 microprocessor chip . 
Translation : Motorola appears to have taken a Hitachi technology that is patented in the U.S. , Hitachi says , and `` tried to make it look like a new technology . '' 
Motorola either denied or would n't comment on the various charges . 
Odds and Ends 
COMPUTER chips that simulate human vision have been developed by Japan 's Sharp Corp . 
They mimic the brain by `` looking '' at an image , extracting the fundamentals -- boundaries , corners and lines -- and translating them into computer data . 
Sharp says the set of chips could improve fax machines , graphics computers or identification systems that recognize facial features ... . 
An N.V . Philips unit has created a computer system that processes video images 3,000 times faster than conventional systems . 
Using reduced instruction-set computing , or RISC , chips made by Intergraph of Huntsville , Ala. , the system splits the image it `` sees '' into 20 digital representations , each processed by one chip . 
Tandy Corp. , citing sluggish sales of consumer-electronics goods , said net income dropped 3.3 % for the first quarter ended Sept. 30 . 
The results , which represented the fifth consecutive quarter of flat-to-lower earnings for the big electronics retailer , disappointed analysts and traders . 
Tandy 's stock fell $ 1.375 a share to close at $ 44 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
Net for the quarter was $ 62.8 million , or 73 cents a share , down from $ 64.9 million , or 72 cents a share , a year earlier . 
The company said earnings would have increased if it had n't been actively repurchasing its shares , thus increasing its interest expense and reducing its interest income . 
Tandy had 86.3 million shares outstanding at Sept. 30 , down from 90 million a year earlier . 
Revenue rose 5 % to $ 986 million from $ 937 million . 
Tandy said consumer electronics sales at its Radio Shack stores have been slow , partly because of a lack of hot , new products . 
`` Radio Shack continues to be lackluster , '' said Dennis Telzrow , analyst with Eppler , Guerin & Turner in Dallas . 
He said Tandy `` has done a decent job '' increasing sales by manufacturing computers for others and expanding sales of its Grid Systems Corp. subsidiary , which sells computers to bigger businesses , but `` it 's not enough to offset the problems at Radio Shack . '' 
Sales at Radio Shack stores open more than a year grew only 2 % in the quarter from a year earlier , he said . 
As a result , Mr. Telzrow said he cut his fiscal 1990 per-share earnings estimate for Tandy to $ 4.05 from $ 4.20 . 
Tandy earned $ 88.8 million , or $ 3.64 a share , in the year ended June 30 . 
Barry Bryant , an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. , said Tandy also has suffered from lethargic sales of its computers aimed at the home and small-office market , which are less-advanced and cheaper than computers aimed at the corporate market . 
Tandy has added several new products to that line , including a laptop computer priced around $ 1,000 , and is focusing its advertising on the easy-to-use software that is packaged with its machines . 
Mr. Bryant and other analysts hope all those moves will combine to help Tandy 's results improve in the important Christmas quarter . 
`` They 've been promising 13 % to 15 % growth based on the strategic moves they 've made , '' he said . 
`` If the earnings acceleration is to take place , that should be the quarter . 
At a private dinner Thursday , Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. chief executive Frederick Joseph delivered a sobering message about the junk bond market to officials of Prudential Insurance Co. of America . 
Mr. Joseph conceded the junk market was in disarray , according to people familiar with the discussion . 
He said Drexel -- the leading underwriter of high-risk junk bonds -- could no longer afford to sell any junk offerings if they might later become troubled because Drexel risked losing its highly lucrative junk franchise . 
The dinner was a stark confirmation that 1989 is the worst year ever for the $ 200 billion junk market . 
And investors and traders alike say the current turmoil could take years to resolve . 
Amid the market disorder , even Drexel , which has the widest and most loyal following of junk bond investors , is pulling in its horns . 
Although the big investment bank still dominates the junk market , Drexel has been unable to stem the fallout from growing junk bond defaults , withdrawn new offerings , redemptions by shareholders in junk bond mutual funds and an exodus of once-devoted investors . 
For many money managers , the past four months have been humiliating . 
`` This is the worst shakeout ever in the junk market , and it could take years before it 's over , '' says Mark Bachmann , a senior vice president at Standard & Poor 's Corp. , a credit rating company . 
In the third quarter , for example , junk bonds -- those with less than an investment-grade rating -- showed negative returns , the only major sector of the bond market to do so . 
Since the end of last year , junk bonds have been outperformed by all categories of investment-grade bonds , including ultra-safe Treasury securities . 
The junk market , which mushroomed to $ 200 billion from less than $ 2 billion at the start of the decade , has been declining for months as issuers have stumbled under the weight of hefty interest payments . 
The fragile market received its biggest jolt last month from Campeau Corp. , which created its U.S. retailing empire with more than $ 3 billion in junk financing . 
Campeau developed a cash squeeze that caused it to be tardy on some interest payments and to put its prestigious Bloomingdale 's department store chain up for sale . 
At that point , the junk market went into a tailspin as buyers disappeared and investors tried to sell . 
In an interview , Mr. Joseph says his dinner discussion with the Prudential executives acknowledged problems for junk . 
`` What I thought I was saying is that the market is troubled but still viable and , appropriately enough , quite quality-conscious , which is not at all bad , '' he says . 
`` Nobody 's been perfect in their credit judgments the past couple years , and we 're going to make sure our default rates are going to be in the acceptable parameters of the market . '' 
What has jolted many junk buyers is the sudden realization that junk bonds can not necessarily be bought and sold with the ease of common stocks and many investment-grade bonds . 
Unlike the New York Stock Exchange , where buyers and sellers are quickly matched , the junk market , where risky corporate loans are traded , is sometimes closed for repairs . 
At closely held Deltec Securities Corp. , junk bond money managers Amy K. Minella and Hannah H. Strasser say the problems of the junk market go deeper than a temporary malaise . 
In recent months , they say , there has been heavy selling of junk bonds by some of the market 's traditional investors , while new buyers have n't materialized to replace them . 
Wall Street securities firms , `` the primary source of liquidity for the high yield market , '' have been net sellers of junk bonds because of trading losses , Deltec said in a recent , grim report to customers . 
Mutual funds have also been net sellers of junk bonds as junk 's relatively poor performance and negative press coverage have produced `` above-normal '' redemptions by shareholders , Deltec said . 
Investors , trying to raise cash , have sold `` large liquid issues '' such as RJR Holdings Corp. and Kroger Co. ; declines in these benchmark issues have contributed to the market 's distress . 
And , Deltec said , buying has been severely reduced because savings and loans have been restricted in their junk purchases by recently passed congressional legislation . 
`` In fact , savings and loans were sellers of high yield holdings throughout the quarter , '' Deltec said . 
Ms. Minella and Ms. Strasser say they are managing their junk portfolios defensively , building cash and selectively upgrading the overall quality . 
Meanwhile , Prudential , the nation 's largest insurer and the biggest investor in junk bonds , has seen the value of its junk bond portfolio drop to $ 6.5 billion from $ 7 billion since August because of falling junk prices . 
`` We certainly do have a lack of liquidity here , and it 's something to be concerned about , '' says James A. Gregoire , a managing director . 
`` I have no reason to think things will get worse , but this market has a knack for surprising us . 
This market teaches us to be humble . '' 
The junk market 's `` yield hogs are learning a real painful lesson , '' he says . 
Although the majority of junk bonds outstanding show no signs of default , the market has downgraded many junk issues as if they were in trouble , says Stuart Reese , manager of Aetna Life & Casualty Insurance Co. 's $ 17 billion investment-grade public bond portfolio . 
`` But we think the risks are there for things getting a lot worse . 
And the risks are n't appropriate for us , '' he says . 
The big insurer , unlike Prudential , owns only about $ 150 million of publicly sold junk bonds . 
The string of big junk bond defaults , which have been a major cause of the market 's problems this year , probably will persist , some analysts say . 
`` If anything , we 're going to see defaults increase because credit ratings have declined , '' says Paul Asquith , associate professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 's Sloan School of Management . 
Mr. Asquith , whose study on junk bond defaults caused a furor on Wall Street when it was disclosed last April , says this year 's junk bond defaults already show a high correlation with his own findings . 
His study showed that junk bonds over time had a cumulative default rate of 34 % . 
One indication of a growing number of junk defaults , Mr. Asquith says , is that about half of the $ 3 billion of corporate bonds outstanding that have been lowered to a default rating by S&P this year are junk bonds sold during the market 's big issue years of 1984 through 1986 . 
These bonds , now rated single-D , include junk offerings by AP Industries , Columbia Savings ( Colorado ) , First Texas Savings Association , Gilbraltar Financial Corp. , Integrated Resources Inc. , Metropolitan Broadcasting Corp. , Resorts International Inc. , Southmark Corp. and Vyquest Inc . 
`` Obviously , we got a lot more smoke than fire from the people who told us the market was n't so risky , '' says Bradford Cornell , professor of finance at University of California 's Anderson Graduate School of Management in Los Angeles . 
Mr. Cornell has just completed a study that finds that the risks and returns of junk bonds are less than on common stocks but more than on investment-grade bonds . 
Mr. Cornell says : `` The junk market is no bonanza as Drexel claimed , but it also is n't a disaster as the doomsayers say . '' 
Despite the junk market 's problems , Drexel continues to enjoy a loyalty among junk bond investors that its Wall Street rivals have n't found . 
During the past three weeks , for example , Drexel has sold $ 1.3 billion of new junk bonds for Turner Broadcasting Co. , Uniroyal Chemical , Continental Air and Duff & Phelps . 
Still , the list of troubled Drexel bond offerings dwarfs that of any firm on Wall Street , as does its successful offerings . 
Troubled Drexel-underwritten issues include Resorts International , Braniff , Integrated Resources , SCI TV , Gillette Holdings , Western Electric and Southmark . 
`` Quality junk bonds will continue to trade well , '' says Michael Holland , chairman of Salomon Brothers Asset Management Inc . 
`` But the deals that never should have been brought have now become nuclear waste . 
As Helen Boehm , who owns an art porcelain company , sipped her luncheon cocktail , she reeled off the names of a few pals -- Prince Charles , Princess Diana , Sarah Ferguson , John Kluge , Milton Petrie . 
Then , flashing a diamond ring as big as the Ritz ( `` my day diamond , darling '' ) , she told her two companions that she is on the `` board '' of the Vatican Museum in Rome . 
As it turns out , the board has a lot of important members , including Winton Blount ( former postmaster general of the U.S. ) , Mrs. Henry Gaisman ( widow of the inventor of auto-strop razor ) and Vincent Murphy ( an investment banker at Merrill Lynch & Co . ) 
But Mrs. Boehm did n't mention any of them . 
`` Helen Boehm has a way with names , '' says James Revson , a gossip columnist for Newsday ( and son of Joseph Revson , a founder of Revlon ) . 
Like which are droppable and which are not . 
With the fall social season well under way , name-droppers are out in force , trying to impress their betters and sometimes put down their lessers . 
But the truth is that almost everyone , from real-estate agents to city fathers , name-drops ; and a surprising number of people have an ancient uncle who claims he lived next door to the cartoonist who did the Katzenjammer Kids . 
( In case you have forgotten , his name was Rudolph Dirks . ) 
`` Name-dropping is pervasive and getting more so as society becomes more complex and alienating , '' says Herbert Freudenberger , a New York psychoanalyst , with a high-powered clientele . 
`` It can be an avenue of entrance to a certain sector of society ... . 
It provides some people a needed sense of affiliation and can help open up a conversation with someone you do n't know . '' 
Like the Long Island matron in the theater district the other day who swore to a stranger that she once met Liza Minnelli . 
`` I was having a drink in Sardi 's , when all of a sudden I saw a woman 's backside coming up the steps on the second floor and she was wearing sequined slacks . 
I knew it was someone important , so I followed her into the ladies room and sure enough , it was Liza . 
So I said , ` Hello . ' 
And she said , ` Hello . ' 
Can you imagine ? 
Liza said hello to me . '' 
Some people must drop names -- call it an irresistible impulse . 
`` They ca n't help talking about the big important people they know , even if they do n't really know them , '' says Dr. Freudenberger . 
Beauregard Houston-Montgomery , a New York writer who changed his name from William Stretch in 1980 , is an inveterate name-dropper . 
`` I do it innately and pathologically , and while it may occasionally get me into trouble , it 's also gotten me access to parties and society , '' he says . 
Name-dropping recently helped Mr. Houston-Montgomery crash a party Fame magazine threw for 100 of the 2,809 people mentioned in the diaries of the late Andy Warhol . 
`` I guess I might have asked Beauregard to leave , but he drops so many good names , we decided to let him stay , '' says Steven Greenberg , publisher of Fame . 
`` After all , Warhol was the ultimate namedropper , dropping five a day in his diaries . 
And Beauregard was mentioned twice -- although very briefly and in passing . '' 
Mr. Houston-Montgomery says that at the party he waved to Malcolm Forbes , publisher of Forbes magazine ( `` We've been in the columns together '' ) , Mary Boone , a New York art dealer ( `` I think she knows me , but I 'm not sure '' ) and Bridget Fonda , the actress ( `` She knows me , but we 're not really the best of friends '' ) . 
Mr. Revson , the gossip columnist , says there are people who actually plan whose names they are going to drop before attending a party . 
These droppers do n't flaunt only their friendships with the Trumps , Brooke Astor or Georgette Mosbacher . 
`` They even drop semi-obscure names like Wolfgang Flottl , whom everybody these days apparently has heard of but no one really knows , '' says Mr. Revson . 
`` It 's the one-upsmanship of name-dropping that counts . '' 
But name-dropping has other benefits , often civic . 
In the name of civic pride and from the desire to nullify a negative image , some city promoters seek to link their municipality with the most recognizable names the city has to offer . 
Take Cleveland . 
It has gotten a bad rep because its once heavily polluted Cuyahoga River caught fire , because former Mayor Ralph Perk set his hair on fire with an acetylene torch and because its proposed Rock 'n' Roll Hall of Fame was recently refused an urban-development grant . 
Some people call it `` The Mistake on the Lake '' -- Lake Erie , that is . 
`` It helps to point out how many important people came through Cleveland on their way to the top , '' says George Miller , executive director of the New Cleveland Campaign , a nonprofit organization devoted to citing the city 's strengths . 
Mr. Miller notes that actor Paul Newman 's family owned a sporting-goods store in Cleveland , that the late actress Margaret Hamilton , who played the bad witch in `` The Wizard Of Oz , '' once ran a nursery school in Cleveland and that comedian Bob Hope 's father , a stonemason , once worked on a church next to Severence Hall , Cleveland 's main concert hall . 
`` Power names like that do n't hurt the city 's reputation , '' Mr. Miller says . 
In Hollywood , an average family can gain cachet from moving into a home vacated by the famous or near famous . 
`` Why we even just sold a three-bedroom house in Van Nuys and were able to keep the price firm in a weak real-estate market by noting that the original Lone Ranger lived there , '' says David Rambo , a sales associate with Jon Douglas Co. , a Los Angeles real-estate agency . 
`` Most people ca n't even remember his name . '' 
( It is John Hart . ) 
Mr. Rambo says that a 3.2-acre property overlooking the San Fernando Valley is priced at $ 4 million because the late actor Erroll Flynn once lived there . 
`` If Flynn had n't lived there , the property might have been priced $ 1 million lower , '' says Mr. Rambo , noting that Flynn 's house has been bulldozed , and only the swimming pool remains . 
Press agents and public-relations practitioners are notorious name-droppers . 
And some even do it with malice aforethought . 
Len Kessler , a financial publicist in New York , sometimes uses it to get the attention of journalists who try to avoid him . 
He says that when Dan Dorfman , a financial columnist with USA Today , has n't returned his phone calls , he leaves messages with Mr. Dorfman 's office saying that he has an important story on Donald Trump , Meshulam Riklis or Marvin Davis . 
He admits he has no story on any of them on these occasions . 
`` But it does get him to return my calls , and it makes me feel better for the times he 's given me the brushoff , '' Mr. Kessler says . 
There are , of course , obvious dangers to blatant , unsubstantiated name-dropping . 
Jeffry Thal , a publicity agent for the Lantz Office in Los Angeles , warns that dropping the wrong name labels the dropper as a fake and a fraud . 
`` Get caught and you 're dead in the water , '' says Mr. Thal . 
Mr. Thal says that Elizabeth Taylor , a client , `` hates being called ` Liz . ' ... 
If directors or producers phone me and say they know ` Liz , ' I know they 've never met her . 
She prefers ` Elizabeth . ' '' 
In New York society , Pat Buckley , the very social wife of author William Buckley , has the nicknames `` Mrs. Buckles '' and `` Patsy . '' 
And her husband sometimes calls her `` Ducky . '' 
`` But call her ` Patty , ' and it 's a sure giveaway you 're not in her circle , because she does n't use that name , '' says Joan Kron , editor-in-chief of Avenue magazine , a monthly publication sent to all the right names . 
John Spencer Churchill , a nephew of the late Sir Winston Churchill , former prime minister of Great Britain , is n't that impressed with most name-droppers he meets . 
That 's because they only drop `` mere names , '' says Mr. Churchill . 
Currently writing his memoirs , Mr. Churchill , an artist , tells how tycoons such as the late Jean Paul Getty , the oil billionnaire , were , in fact , known only by one initial , their last . 
`` When you 're at the club , you ask whether they 've spoken to ` G . ' 
Now they know who you mean and you know who you mean . 
But no one else does . 
Now that 's name-dropping , if you know what I mean . 
Part of a Series } 
SMYRNA , Ga. -- 
The auto-dealer strip in this booming suburb runs nearly five miles along Cobb Parkway , stretching from the Perimeter highway that circles Atlanta to the `` Big Chicken , '' a pullet-roofed fast-food restaurant and local landmark . 
Twenty years ago , in the infancy of suburban sprawl , just a handful of dealerships were here . 
Now there are 23 . 
Alongside such long-familiar names as Chevrolet , Ford and Dodge are nameplates that did n't exist until three years ago : Acura , Sterling , Hyundai . 
Under construction is the strip 's 24th showroom , the future home of Lexus , a luxury marque launched by Toyota Motor Corp. just two months ago . 
The 1980s have spawned an explosion of consumer choice in America , in everything from phone companies to colas . 
And especially , as the Cobb Parkway strip attests , in cars . 
Americans now can choose among 572 different models of cars , vans and trucks , up from just 408 when the decade began , according to Automotive News , a trade publication . 
For car marketers , it has become a much tougher battle to keep loyal customers from defecting to one of the new makes on the block . 
For American car buyers , the proliferation of choice is both liberating and confusing . 
Malcolm MacDougall , vice chairman of the Jordan , McGrath , Case & Taylor advertising agency in New York , calls the proliferation `` nameplate mania . '' 
He says the number of automobile choices is causing stress among consumers today , and that people will simply ignore new models that lack a well-defined image . 
`` The winners , '' he predicts , `` will be brands from car makers that have traditionally been associated with quality and value . '' 
He says it 's important for a new make to be as distinctive as possible while still retaining links to the parent company 's quality image . 
He applauds Toyota and Nissan Motor Co. for creating separate divisions for their new luxury models , rather than simply adding more nameplates to their standard car lines . 
Some auto executives believe the benefits of more choice outweigh the drawbacks . 
`` There 's more noise out there , and the consumer may have to work harder to cut through it , '' says Vincent P. Barabba , executive director of market research and planning at General Motors Corp . 
`` But the reward is that there 's less need to make tradeoffs '' in choosing one 's wheels . 
Jeanene Page , of North Salt Lake City , Utah , likes the broader selection . 
She wants something big , and already has looked at the Chrysler New Yorker and Lincoln Town Car . 
Now , the 55-year-old car shopper is zeroing in on a full-sized van , figuring that it 's just the thing to haul nine grandchildren and pull a boat at the same time . 
`` That seems to be what all my friends are using to take the grandkids to the lake , '' she says . 
Market segmentation in cars is n't new , but it 's far more extensive than when Alfred P. Sloan Jr. conceived the idea 50 years ago . 
The legendary GM chairman declared that his company would make `` a car for every purse and purpose . '' 
Now there are many cars for every purse and purpose . 
Just four years ago , GM planners divided the combined car and truck market into seven segments . 
Today , they identify 19 distinct segments for cars , and another 11 for trucks and vans . 
The number of makes has mushroomed because the U.S. is the world 's biggest and richest market for automobiles ; virtually every auto maker wants to sell here . 
For every brand like Renault or Fiat that has been squeezed out , others such as Isuzu , Daihatsu and Mitsubishi have come in . 
Detroit tries to counter the foreign invasion with new brands of its own . 
GM launched the Geo marque this year to sell cars made in partnership with foreign auto makers , and next year GM 's long-awaited Saturn cars will make their debut . 
Ford Motor Co. created the Merkur nameplate in 1985 to sell its German-made touring sedans in the U.S. . 
But slow sales forced Ford to kill the brand just last week . 
When consumers have so many choices , brand loyalty is much harder to maintain . 
The Wall Street Journal 's `` American Way of Buying '' survey found that 53 % of today 's car buyers tend to switch brands . 
For the survey , Peter D. Hart Research Associates and the Roper Organization each asked about 2,000 U.S. consumers about their buying habits . 
Which cars do Americans favor most these days ? 
It 's hard to generalize , but age seems to be the best predictor . 
Adults under age 30 like sports cars , luxury cars , convertibles and imports far more than their elders do . 
Three of every 10 buyers under 30 would prefer to buy a sports car , compared with just 16 % of adults 30 and over , according to the Journal survey . 
Young consumers prefer luxury cars by a 37 % to 28 % margin -- even though older buyers , because of their incomes , are more likely to actually purchase a luxury car . 
Perhaps most striking , 35 % of households headed by people aged 18 to 44 have at least one foreign car . 
That 's true of only 14 % of households headed by someone 60 or older . 
Generally , imports appeal most to Americans who live in the West and are well-educated , affluent and , especially , young . 
`` For many baby boomers , buying a domestic car is a totally foreign experience , '' says Christopher Cedergren , auto-market analyst with J.D. Power & Co. of Agoura Hills , Calif . 
Such preferences persist even though many Americans believe differences between imported and domestic cars are diminishing . 
Only 58 % of Americans now believe that foreign cars get better gas mileage than domestic models , the Journal survey found , down from 68 % in 1987 . 
Some 46 % give foreign cars higher quality ratings , down from 50 % two years ago . 
On the other hand , only 42 % say foreign cars are less comfortable than U.S. models , down from 55 % in 1987 . 
People in the automotive business disagree over how susceptible younger Americans are to brand switching . 
`` Once buying habits are formed , they 're very hard to break , '' declares Thomas Mignanelli , executive vice president for Nissan 's U.S. sales operations . 
But out on Cobb Parkway , Ted Negas sees it differently . 
`` The competition is so intense that an owner 's loyalty to a dealership or a car is virtually nonexistent , '' says Mr. Negas , vice president of Ed Voyles Oldsmobile , one of the first dealerships to locate on the strip . 
Thus the very fickleness of baby boomers may make it possible to win them back , just as it was possible to lose them . 
The battle for customer loyalty is evident along the Cobb Parkway strip . 
Ed Voyles Olds recently established a special section in the service department for owners whose cars are less than a year old , so they get quicker service . 
Just down the street , Chris Volvo invites serious shoppers to test-drive a new Volvo to any other dealership along the strip , and compare the cars side-by-side . 
Manufacturers , too , are stretching further to lure buyers . 
GM 's Cadillac division , ignoring Detroit 's long-held maxim that safety does n't sell , is airing television commercials touting its cars ' safety features . 
Cadillac may be on to something . 
Some 60 % of the survey respondents said they would buy anti-lock brakes even if they carry a medium or high price tag . 
More than 50 % felt the same way about air bags . 
Both features appealed most to buyers under 45 . 
In contrast , dashboard computers , power seats and turbo-charged engines had little appeal . 
But even a little appeal has a lot of attraction these days . 
GM 's Pontiac division is offering a turbo-charged V-6 engine on its Grand Prix model , even though it expects to sell only about 4,000 cars equipped with that option . 
The reason : Items with narrow appeal can be important in a market as fragmented as today 's . 
Americans spent more than $ 190 billion on new cars and trucks last year , and just 1 % of that market exceeded Polaroid Co. 's sales of $ 1.86 billion . 
`` Even if it 's only 1 % , '' says GM 's Mr. Barabba , `` would you throw away sales the size of Polaroid ? '' 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. said it will lay off 75 to 85 technicians here , effective Nov. 1 . 
The workers install , maintain and repair its private branch exchanges , which are large intracompany telephone networks . 
It 's a California crime saga worthy of an Erle Stanley Gardner title : The Case of the Purloined Palm Trees . 
Edward Carlson awoke one morning last month to find eight holes in his front yard where his prized miniature palms , called cycads , once stood . 
Days later , the thieves returned and dug out more , this time adding insult to injury . 
`` The second time , '' he says , `` they left the shovel . '' 
No garden-variety crime , palm-tree rustling is sprouting up all over Southern California , bringing big bucks to crooks who know their botany . 
Cycads , the most popular of which is the Sago Palm , are doll-sized versions of California 's famous long-necked palms , with stubby trunks and fern-like fronds . 
Because the Sago is relatively rare and grows only a couple of inches a year , it 's a pricey lawn decoration : A two-foot tall Sago can retail for $ 1,000 , and taller ones often fetch $ 3,000 or more . 
`` Evidently , somebody has realized it 's easy money to steal these things , '' says Loran Whitelock , a research associate specializing in cycads at the Los Angeles State and County Arboretum . 
Just last week , would-be thieves damaged three Sagos at Mr. Whitelock 's home in the Eagle Rock section before something frightened them off , foiled . 
`` It 's hard to think someone is raping your garden , '' he says . 
Police suspect that the criminals , who dig up the plants in the dead of night , are selling them to nurseries or landscapers . 
The Sago has become a popular accent in tony new housing tracts , apparently giving the rustlers a ready market for their filched fronds . 
Thieves are going to find `` anybody who has enough bucks to plant these things in their front yard , '' says William Morrissey , an investigator with the police department in Garden Grove , Calif. , where five such thefts have been reported in the past several weeks . 
The department is advising residents to plant Sagos , if they must , in the back yard and telling nurseries to be on the lookout for anyone trying to palm one off . 
But for those Californians who want exotic gardens out front where neighbors can appreciate them , there 's always Harold Smith 's approach . 
After three Sagos were stolen from his home in Garden Grove , `` I put a big iron stake in the ground and tied the tree to the stake with a chain , '' he says proudly . 
`` And you ca n't cut this chain with bolt cutters . 
Program trading on the New York Stock Exchange in September rose to its highest recorded level as a percentage of total monthly trading volume . 
September program trading amounted to 13.8 % of average daily New York Stock Exchange volume of 151.8 million shares , the largest percentage since the exchange began making such figures public in July 1988 . 
A daily average of 20.9 million shares traded in program strategies in September , the second-highest level ever . 
The highest level was in June 1989 , when a daily average of 22.1 million shares traded in program strategies . 
Average daily trading volume in June of 180.3 million shares was considerably higher than in September . 
Program trading amounted to 12.3 % of average daily volume in June . 
The Big Board says program trading describes a variety of strategies involving the purchase or sale of a basket of 15 or more stocks . 
The most controversial of these is stock-index arbitrage , in which traders buy or sell baskets of stocks and offset the position with an opposite trade in stock-index futures to lock in profits . 
It 's the most controversial form of program trading because it can create abrupt price swings in the stock market . 
Salomon Brothers Inc. was the top program trader in September , but most of the firm 's activity involved portfolio trading strategies other than stock-index arbitrage . 
Overall , Salomon reported program trading volume of 75.2 million shares . 
The top stock-index arbitrage firm last month was Morgan Stanley & Co . 
Of Morgan Stanley 's 66.8 million shares in program trades for the month , 53.1 million were in stock-index arbitrage trades . 
Behind second-place Morgan Stanley were Kidder , Peabody & Co. , Goldman , Sachs & Co. and CS First Boston Inc. 's First Boston Corp. unit . 
A group of shareholders filed suit against Imperial Corp. of America , Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. , First Executive Corp. and others , charging them with artificially inflating Imperial 's stock price to protect certain major investors . 
The complaint , filed in federal district court , accuses Imperial and other defendants of issuing false and misleading financial data . 
It also charges that Imperial , the holding company for Imperial Savings & Loan , experienced major losses and writedowns because of improper assessment of the risks of junk-bond investments and wholesale consumer loan packages . 
The suit seeks unspecified damages . 
Imperial is in the midst of reducing its junk-bond holdings and getting out of the investment banking business in order to return to traditional thrift activities . 
The derivative suit is similar to a class-action complaint filed earlier this year . 
Imperial said in a statement it expects other complaints to be filed in the wake of the original suit and a recent article in Barron 's magazine that focused on the company 's problems . 
Although an Imperial spokesman said the company had n't yet been served with the derivative suit , he reiterated the company 's statement that it would vigorously defend itself against the class-action suit . 
Spokesmen at Drexel and First Executive said the companies had n't yet been served with the suit . 
In a separate complaint also filed in federal court here , shareholder Max Grill of New York charged Imperial , its top executives and directors with breach of fiduciary duty and squandering the company 's assets . 
Imperial said it had n't been served with this suit either . 
Companies listed below reported quarterly profit substantially different from the average of analysts ' estimates . 
The companies are followed by at least three analysts , and had a minimum five-cent change in actual earnings per share . 
Estimated and actual results involving losses are omitted . 
The percent difference compares actual profit with the 30-day estimate where at least three analysts have issues forecasts in the past 30 days . 
Otherwise , actual profit is compared with the 300-day estimate . 
Rhone-Poulenc S.A. , Paris , said it completed the purchase of the specialty chemicals operation of RTZ Corp. , a British mining and industrial group . 
Rhone-Poulenc , a chemical and pharmaceutical company , said RTZ Chemicals has annual sales of about $ 900 million . 
It did n't release terms of the transaction . 
Consumer spending in Britain rose 0.1 % in the third quarter from the second quarter and was up 3.8 % from a year ago , the Central Statistical Office estimated Friday . 
A group including Gene E. Phillips , former chairman of Southmark Corp. , and William S. Friedman , former vice chairman of Southmark , lowered its stake in the Dallas real estate concern to 7.7 % , according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission . 
The group said it sold 455,410 Southmark common shares from Sept. 5 to Oct. 5 for 18.75 cents to 25 cents a share . 
The filing said the group continues to hold 3,481,887 remaining shares . 
Eastman Kodak Co. , seeking to position itself in the potentially huge high-definition television market , unveiled a converter that can transform conventional motion-picture film into high-definition video . 
The move also helps the Rochester , N.Y. , photographic giant ensure that its motion-picture film business -- for which it holds a virtual monopoly , supplying every Hollywood movie company -- is n't made obsolete by the upstart HDTV business . 
While the prototype converter is costly , it 's being lauded by the infant HDTV industry as a way of increasing the number of high-quality shows that can be seen on the new medium . 
`` The industry has been waiting with bated breath for the machines to come along , '' says David Niles , president of Eleven Twenty Five Productions Inc. , a New York pioneer in high-definition programming . 
He notes that industry executives have until now worried that they would face a severe shortage of programs once consumers begin replacing their TV sets with HDTVs . 
Japanese electronic giants , such as Sony Corp. and Hitachi Ltd. , have focused almost entirely on HDTV hardware , and virtually ignored software or programs shot in high-definition . 
And only a handful of small U.S. companies are engaged in high-definition software development . 
It 's estimated that just about 250 hours of HD programming is currently available for airing . 
Kodak says its new CCD HDTV converter will help alleviate the problem by allowing programmers and broadcasters to convert movies and television programs shot in 35mm motion-picture film into high-definition video . 
Consumers will be able to switch on their HDTV sets and get all the viewing benefits the high-tech medium offers . 
Otherwise , they 'd be watching programs that are no different in quality from what they currently view on color TVs . 
It would be like `` watching a black and white movie on a color TV set , '' says Malcolm G. Saull , chairman of the film and video department at the Rochester Institute of Technology . 
The new converters are `` a critical link between film and the television domain , '' says Joerg D. Agin , vice president and general manager of Kodak 's Motion Picture and Audiovisual Products division . 
Kodak wo n't disclose the cost or when its converter will be on the market , but it 's estimated the machine may be available within two years . 
A similar machine already on the market , made by Rank Sintel Ltd. , a unit of Rank Organisation , costs about $ 500,000 . 
And the potential market is tremendous , industry experts say . 
If HDTV takes off in the U.S. , there will be demand for some 4,000 to 5,000 HDTV converters , known in the industry as telecines . 
Demand will come first from programming production companies and then from television stations . 
`` The converter is head and shoulders above anything else I 've seen , '' says Richard J. Stumpf , vice president - engineering and development at MCA Inc. 's Universal City Studios . 
And Mr. Niles , the program producer , contends that Kodak 's move is `` a sound marketing decision . 
They ca n't afford to stay out of HDTV . '' 
Indeed , the stakes are high . 
The U.S. electronics industry estimates that the HDTV market will total about $ 150 billion over the next two decades , with an additional $ 400 billion expected to go for related products . 
HDTVs break down images into more than 1,100 lines , compared with 525 for today 's televisions , providing considerably sharper detail . 
And the sets are wider , resembling the dimensions of a movie screen . 
But the financial rewards are n't expected soon , nor are they guaranteed . 
Experts estimate the first sets of HDTVs wo n't be available for another five to 10 years , and will probably retail for more than $ 3,000 each in today 's dollars . 
Some critics say they wo n't be quickly embraced by consumers because of the high price . 
Nevertheless , Kodak could n't risk letting HDTV turn its motion-picture film business into a dinosaur . 
`` Kodak understands HDTV is where everybody is going , '' says RIT 's Mr. Spaull . 
Yet another political scandal is racking Japan . 
But this time it 's hurting opposition as well as ruling-party members . 
And as it unfolds , it 's revealing some of the more tangled and seamier aspects of Japanese society . 
Already , ruling Liberal Democratic Party demands that opposition members testify under oath in parliament have stalled one budget committee session and forced the committee to plan a special two-day investigation at the end of the month . 
But the scandal itself is so convoluted that ruling-party members are divided between those who want to pursue the matter in hope of undermining the opposition and those who favor leaving well enough alone . 
`` The opposition can be the most hurt because everyone already figures the LDP is that kind of beast , '' says Shigezo Hayasaka , former aide to LDP kingmaker Kakuei Tanaka and now an independent analyst . 
But , he adds , `` We ca n't tell where it will go at all because we 're still in the middle of it . '' 
This time , the scandal centers on donations made by the not-quite-mainstream pachinko parlor industry . 
Pachinko , a kind of pinball , is Japan 's favorite form of legal gambling . 
The donations so far appear to be small , especially compared with the huge sums that changed hands in the Recruit Co . influence-peddling scandal that plagued the ruling party last year . 
But the implications could be great . 
Pachinko is slightly on the shady side , often linked to the lower ranks of Japan 's underworld and regularly at the top of annual lists of tax evaders . 
Recently the industry has faced the threat of new restrictions , and political donations may have been made with the intent to bribe . 
Also , about 60 % of pachinko parlor owners are Korean , many of whom maintain close ties with North or South Korean residents ' organizations , and donations by such foreign groups are illegal in Japan . 
To many Japanese , pachinko is benign or enticingly unsavory . 
Garish neon pachinko marquees blaze from the main streets and narrow alleys of cities and towns across the country . 
Devotees pass hours , watching the lights blink and listening to the metal balls ping , as much to gamble as to get a little time to be anonymous , alone with their thoughts . 
At 500 yen ( $ 3.60 ) for a handful of balls , pachinko is a common pastime , and has been since it took root as cheap entertainment in the years after World War II . 
But the total of all those pinging balls has created an industry with a reported annual income of 13 trillion yen ( almost $ 92 billion ) , or nearly the size of Japan 's vaunted automobile industry . 
And because the pachinko industry is regularly at the top of annual lists for tax evasion , some observers estimate the real income could be as much as 20 trillion yen . 
If that money were being taxed , it could bring the government a badly needed several trillion yen . 
In 1984 , an attempt was made to crack down on the industry with tougher restrictions . 
Then , in 1988 , a proposal to keep better track of income by selling prepaid cards for pachinko was fielded in parliament . 
The proposal split the industry in two , along the lines of national origin : North Koreans oppose the plan while South Koreans , Japanese and Taiwanese accept it or are neutral . 
In August , a conservative weekly magazine reported that a pachinko industry organization donated money to Japan Socialist Party members . 
The magazine alleged that in making the donations , the pachinko industry may have been offering bribes to win support in the battle against prepaid cards , or it may have been laundering money back and forth between the JSP and the North Korean residents ' organization , the Chosen Soren . 
The Chosen Soren and the JSP immediately denied the report . 
And at first , neither the opposition nor the LDP wanted to pursue the issue . 
But the press kept it alive ; as with the Recruit scandal , lists began circulating with names of people who had received money . 
Within a matter of weeks , less-conservative magazines reported that members of the ruling LDP had received much larger donations from pachinko organizations . 
So far , though , there have been no allegations that the contributions the LDP members received amounted to bribes . 
Then the two camps upped the ante : Reports that Chosen Soren had donated directly to JSP members were rapidly countered by statements that the South Korean residents ' organization had long been donating directly to LDP members . 
The JSP admitted Oct. 13 that its members received about eight million yen from the pachinko organization , and charged LDP members with receiving 125 million yen ( $ 880,000 ) and other opposition parties with taking about 2.5 million yen . 
On Friday , the chief cabinet secretary announced that eight cabinet ministers had received five million yen from the industry , including 450,000 yen ( $ 3,175 ) by Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu . 
No one has alleged that the donations were by themselves illegal . 
Direct donations from either of the residents ' organizations would be illegal because the groups are defined as foreign , but both groups deny making direct donations . 
They say it s possible some of their members may be donating privately . 
The issue is further complicated because although the organizations represent Korean residents , those residents were largely born and raised in Japan and many speak only Japanese . 
That they retain Korean citizenship and ties is a reflection of history -- their parents were shipped in as laborers during the decades when Japan occupied Korea before World War II -- and the discrimination that still faces Koreans in Japanese society . 
Many Japanese think it only natural that the organizations or their members would donate to politicians , the way many Japanese do , to win favor or support . 
Both residents ' organizations admit to receiving some funding from abroad . 
But LDP members and supporters of the prepaid card idea tend to speak in innuendo about the JSP 's alleged donations , implying that North Korean money would be more suspect than South Korean because North Korea is communist and South Korea is an ally . 
When Robert McDuffie was 14 , he got a chance to play in the starting lineup for his high school basketball team in Macon , Ga . 
Unfortunately , his mother had tickets for a recital by Itzhak Perlman the same night , and she was adamant about his attending . 
`` I threw such a fit , '' says Mr. McDuffie , who had begun violin studies at the age of six . 
`` But once Perlman started playing , I did n't give a damn about basketball ... . 
Afterwards , I went home and practiced for three hours . '' 
Today , it 's obvious that the brawny , six-foot , one-inch musician made the right choice . 
At 31 , Mr. McDuffie has a rich , full-bodied tone , an admirable rhythmic precision and an increasingly busy schedule . 
He 's currently in the midst of a 17-city U.S. tour with Yehudi Menuhin and the Warsaw Sinfonia , with stops including Charleston , S.C . ( Oct. 25 ) , Sarasota , Fla . ( Oct. 28 ) , Tampa , Fla . ( Oct. 29 ) and Miami ( Oct. 31 ) . 
Later this season he gives a recital at Washington 's Kennedy Center , and appears as soloist with several major orchestras . 
Yet Mr. McDuffie 's career has developed at a slower pace than those of some of his better known contemporaries . 
During the late 1970s , he was part of a musical `` brat pack '' -- a group of budding virtuosos who studied at the Juilliard School with the noted pedagogue Dorothy DeLay . 
His violin classmates included Shlomo Mintz , a protege of Isaac Stern who performed with major orchestras while still a student ; Cho-Liang Lin , who joined the roster of ICM Artists Inc. at the age of 18 ; and Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg , who launched her career by winning the 1981 Naumberg Competition . 
`` I thought I was over the hill at 22 , '' recalls Mr. McDuffie , an outgoing man with pale blue eyes and a light Southern drawl . 
`` But I was n't ready for a career at that time . '' 
Young McDuffie 's first violin teacher was Henrik Schwarzenberger , a Hungarian refugee who taught in the Macon public school system . 
`` He taught me how to play like a gypsy , '' jokes the musician . 
`` I did n't learn to count until I got to Juilliard . '' 
After studies at that conservatory 's Pre-College Division with an assistant to the legendary instructor Ivan Galamian , he switched at the college level to Miss DeLay , Mr. Galamian 's longtime assistant and , ultimately , his rival . 
`` I think I had to prove myself to her , '' says Mr. McDuffie . 
`` But she was always encouraging . 
She only put her foot down twice , '' he continues . 
`` In my freshman year , my roommate was known as a party animal . 
She thought I was n't getting my practicing done . '' 
As the violinist tells it , his grandmotherly looking teacher `` put her hands on her hips , stomped her foot and said , ` You 've just got to get the { expletive deleted } out of there . ' '' 
The second incident took place after Mr. McDuffie gave an ambitious student recital and was feeling rather pleased with himself . 
Miss DeLay requested that he come to her studio with a tape of the recital . 
`` We listened to the Chausson ` Poeme , ' '' he recalls , `` and she said , ` You hear the first note , that B-flat ? 
That 's the only note that 's truly in tune ... ' . '' 
`` That 's the most important experience I 've had with any teacher , '' he says , `` because she taught me how to listen . 
Now , when I play with orchestras , the musicians often compliment me on my intonation . '' 
It was also at Juilliard that Mr. McDuffie discovered his predilection for conservative , 20th-century American composers such as David Diamond and Samuel Barber . 
After winning a school competition with a performance of the latter 's `` Violin Concerto , '' Mr. McDuffie was invited to play the work for the composer , who was dying of cancer . 
`` Barber was seated by the fireplace looking very pale , '' recalls the violinist , who performed the work with a piano accompanist at the composer 's apartment . 
`` He did n't say much , but what he said was important because it 's not in the score . 
There 's a beautiful , Coplandesque motif -- he 'd kill me if he heard me say that -- throughout the first movement ... 
The only time the violin has it is right at the end . 
It 's written ` marcato ' in the score , and I played it that way , kind of gigue-like . 
And he yelled out ` dolce ! dolce ! ' { ` sweet ! sweet ! ' } . '' 
`` So we did it over , '' he adds . 
`` I played very transparently , with the tip of the bow . 
If a conductor is sensitive enough to bring down the orchestra { volume } at that point , it makes the piece magical . 
I do n't know why Barber never told anybody else . 
On Isaac Stern 's recording it 's very biting . '' 
Since leaving Juilliard , Mr. McDuffie has made some smart moves and some controversial ones . 
His guest appearance on the NBC soap opera `` Another World , '' scandalized musical elitists . 
By contrast , he 's won kudos for his espousal of William Schuman 's `` Violin Concerto , '' which he recently recorded for Angel / EMI along with Leonard Bernstein 's engaging `` Serenade for Violin Solo , Strings and Percussion . '' 
Mr. McDuffie 's sweet tone , heartfelt lyricism and rhythmic punch make him an ideal interpreter of both works . 
Aided by the fluid playing of the St. Louis Symphony under Leonard Slatkin 's direction , this `` Serenade '' really swings . 
Mr. Schuman 's `` Violin Concerto , '' which sounds more like a mildly atonal rhapsody for solo violin with orchestral accompaniment , meanders until the propulsive `` Agitato , fervente . '' 
But there are ample rewards in its plaintive slow sections and virtuoso fireworks for soloist , brass and timpani . 
At Avery Fisher Hall here , Mr. McDuffie was heard recently with Mr. Menuhin and the Warsaw Sinfonia in more conventional fare -- Bruch 's overwrought `` Violin Concerto in G Minor . '' 
His performance was so effusive and driven that the phrases rarely breathed . 
The 35-member Sinfonia played adroitly with a big , lush sound that belied its size . 
Whatever he plays , Mr. McDuffie finds satisfaction in the music itself -- `` something greater out there than me , '' as he puts it during an interview at the Manhattan apartment he shares with wife , Camille , a literary publicist . 
`` A normal person did not write the Beethoven ` Violin Concerto , ' '' he declares . 
`` Even when I hear it played badly , I 'm still humbled by the piece . 
If I could ever feel I 've contributed to it in some way , then all the hard work has been worth it . '' 
Ms. Jepson is a free-lance music writer in New York . 
Are consumers too deep in hock ? 
A lot of observers think so , and , if they 're right , the whole economy as well as the spendthrifts among us could be hurt . 
A sudden , forced cutback by consumers , who normally account for about two-thirds of economic activity , would damp the economy at a time when plant-and-equipment spending is slowing and deficit-racked governments ca n't readily take up the slack . 
And another wave of bad loans would further batter many already-shaky lending institutions . 
The worriers cite some worrisome trends . 
During the almost seven-year-old economic expansion , inflation-adjusted gross national product , disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures have risen 30 % , but inflation-adjusted consumer installment credit has surged 66 % . 
And the ratio of installment debt to disposable personal income -- personal income after taxes -- has hit a high of about 18 1\/2 % . 
However , these figures do n't seem to worry Thomas A. Durkin , an economist at the Federal Reserve Board . 
In a paper presented at the recent annual meeting of the National Association of Business Economists in San Francisco , Mr. Durkin comments that `` installment credit always grows rapidly in cyclical advances , and growth in this cycle is very typical of earlier experiences . '' 
He adds : `` We are now witnessing a slowdown which , if history is a guide , could persist for a while . '' 
But what about the debt burden ? 
Mr. Durkin doubts that `` there is some magic level '' at which the ratio of installment debt to disposable income `` indicates economic problems . '' 
And , `` more importantly , '' he says , `` the debt burden measured other ways is not really in uncharted waters . '' 
The chart below shows why ( see accompanying illustration -- WSJ Oct. 23 , 1989 ) . 
The ratio of consumer installment credit to disposable income , though up a bit , has n't climbed steeply , and such debt as a percent of household assets is little changed . 
Moreover , the burden of consumer credit payments relative to disposable income may be `` lower in this cycle than earlier , '' Mr. Durkin says . 
He notes that some `` revolving credit-card credit is actually convenience credit '' being used simply as a handy way of paying bills rather than a handy way of borrowing . 
In addition , he says , `` longer maturities on automobile and other forms of installment credit boost the stock of debt faster than the flow of repayments and the accompanying payment burden . '' 
And if you `` consider the changing distribution of credit , '' Mr. Durkin says , `` much of the increase in debt in recent years is due to increasing credit use by higher-income families , '' that is , `` those probably best able to handle it . '' 
Citing figures on home-equity loans , he notes that `` 11 % of homeowners had home-equity credit accounts , but the proportion rises to 16 % of homeowners in the $ 45,000-$60,000 income range and 23 % of homeowners with income above $ 60,000 . '' 
And much home-equity credit is used conservatively . 
`` The most frequent use is home improvement , which presumably improves the value of the property , '' Mr. Durkin says . 
So , it is n't surprising that consumer-credit delinquencies at banks remain , as the chart shows , reassuringly below some earlier highs ( see accompanying illustration -- WSJ Oct. 23 , 1989 ) . 
A severe recession could , of course , raise delinquency rates , but so far the current levels of consumer debt do n't seem to loom as a major threat . 
In fact , the current weakness in auto buying and department-store sales and the gradual upturn in the household saving rate suggest that consumers , conservative as ever , are already clutching their purses a bit more tightly . 
In July , consumer installment credit outstanding fell for the first time since January 1987 . 
`` Consumers appear unwilling to add to their leverage to support their spending , '' Bruce Steinberg , a Merrill Lynch economist , says . 
`` As a result , household debt appears to be stabilizing at around 63 % of GNP . '' 
Consumers , credit cards in hand , are n't running amok through the shopping malls -- or putting the economy at any great risk . 
Maidenform Inc. loves to be intimate with its customers , but not with the rest of the public . 
The 67-year-old maker of brassieres , panties , and lingerie enjoys one of the best-known brand images , but its financial profile is closely guarded by members of the founding family . 
`` There are very few companies that can boast of such a close-knit group , '' says Robert A. Brawer , 52 years old , recently named president , succeeding Beatrice Coleman , his mother-in-law , who remains chairman . 
`` We are a vanishing breed , '' he muses . 
Mrs. Coleman , 73 , who declined to be interviewed , is the Maidenform strategist . 
Sales have tripled during her 21-year tenure to about $ 200 million in 1988 . 
Maidenform says it is very profitable but declines to provide specifics . 
The company sells image . 
Its current ad campaign , on which Maidenform has spent more than $ 15 million since fall 1987 , does n't even show its underwear products , but rather men like Christopher Reeve , star of the `` Superman '' movies , talking about their lingerie turn-ons . 
The Maidenform name `` is part of American pop culture , '' says Joan Sinopoli , account supervisor of the campaign by Levine , Huntley , Schmidt & Beaver , a New York ad firm . 
Maidenform generated such memorable campaigns as `` I dreamed I ... in my Maidenform bra , '' and `` The Maidenform woman . 
You never know where she 'll turn up . '' 
`` Capitalizing on the brand is key , '' says Mr. Brawer , whose immediate plans include further international expansion and getting better control of distribution outside the U.S. . 
`` The intimate apparel industry is perceived to be a growth industry and clearly { Maidenform } is a force to be reckoned with , '' says David S. Leibowitz , a special situations analyst at American Securities Corp. in New York . 
Although working women are `` forced to wear the uniform of the day , to retain their femininity they are buying better quality , more upscale intimate apparel , '' he said . 
Although Mr. Brawer 's appointment as president was long expected , the move on Sept. 25 precipitated the resignation of Alan Lesk as senior vice president of sales and merchandising . 
Three days later , Mr. Lesk was named president and chief executive officer of Olga Co. , a competing intimate apparel division of Warnaco Inc . 
Warnaco also owns Warners , another major intimate apparel maker . 
Mr. Lesk could n't be reached to comment . 
But Maidenform officials say that after spending 24 years at Maidenform , Mr. Lesk , 48 , made it clear he wanted the top job . 
`` If you want the presidency of the company , this is n't the firm to work for , '' says James Mogan , 45 , who was named senior vice president of sales , assuming some of the responsibilities of Mr. Lesk . 
The company downplayed the loss of Mr. Lesk and split his merchandising responsibilities among a committee of four people . 
`` My style is less informal , '' Mr. Brawer says . 
Top officers insist Maidenform 's greatest strength is its family ownership . 
`` You ca n't go anywhere in this company and find an organizational chart , '' one delights . 
`` It is fun competing as a private company , '' Mr. Brawer says . 
`` You can think long range . '' 
Other major players in intimate apparel apparently feel the same way . 
Warnaco was taken private by Spectrum Group in 1986 for about $ 487 million . 
And last year , Playtex Holdings Inc. went private for about $ 680 million . 
It was then split into Playtex Apparel Inc. , the intimate apparel division , and Playtex Family Products Corp. , which makes tampons , hair-care items and other products . 
Publicly traded VF Corp. , which owns Vanity Fair , and Sara Lee Corp. , which owns Bali Co. , are also strong forces in intimate apparel . 
Buy-out offers for Maidenform are n't infrequent , says Executive Vice President David C. Masket , but they are n't taken very seriously . 
When he gets calls , `` I do n't even have to consult '' with Mrs. Coleman , Mr. Masket says . 
The company could command a good price in the market . 
`` Over the past three and a half years , apparel companies , many of whom have strong brand names , have been bought at about 60 % of sales , '' says Deborah Bronston , Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. apparel analyst . 
Mr. Brawer , along with Mrs. Coleman and her daughter , Elizabeth , an attorney who is vice chairman , are the family members involved in the operations of Maidenform , which employs about 5,000 . 
Mr. Brawer 's wife , Catherine , and Robert Stroup , Elizabeth 's husband , round out the five-member board . 
Each has an equal vote at the monthly meetings . 
`` We are all very amiable , '' Mr. Brawer says . 
Executives say Mrs. Coleman is very involved in the day-to-day operations , especially product development . 
In the late 1960s she designed a lightweight stretch bra that boosted sales . 
Her father , William Rosenthal , designed the then-dress making company 's first bra in the 1920s , which he said gave women a `` maiden form '' compared with the `` boyish form '' they got from the `` flat bandages '' used for support at the time . 
While Mr. Rosenthal introduced new undergarment designs , his wife , Ida , concentrated on sales and other financial matters . 
The name Maidenform was coined by a third business partner , Enid Bissett . 
The company has 14 plants and distribution facilities in the U.S. , Puerto Rico , other parts of the Caribbean and Ireland . 
Maidenform products are mainly sold at department stores , but the company has quietly opened a retail store of its own in Omaha , Neb. , and has 24 factory outlets , with plans to add more . 
Before joining Maidenform in 1972 , Mr. Brawer , who holds a doctoral degree in English from the University of Chicago , taught at the University of Wisconsin . 
As a senior vice president , he has headed the company 's designer lingerie division , Oscar de la Renta , since its inception in 1988 . 
To maintain exclusivity of that designer line , it is n't labeled with the Maidenform name . 
While the company has always been family-run , Mr. Brawer is n't the first person to marry into the family and subsequently head Maidenform . 
Mrs. Coleman 's husband , Joseph , a physician , succeeded Mrs. Rosenthal as president and served in that post until his death in 1968 . 
China could exhaust its foreign-exchange reserves as early as next year , a Western government report says , unless imports are cut drastically to help narrow the balance-of-payments deficit . 
According to the report , completed last month , if China 's trade gap continues to widen at the pace seen in the first seven months of this year , the reserves would be wiped out either in 1990 or 1991 . 
A country is considered financially healthy if its reserves cover three months of its imports . 
The $ 14 billion of reserves China had in June would cover just that much . 
The report by the Western government , which declines to be identified , concludes that `` a near-term foreign-exchange payment problem can be avoided only if import growth drops to below 5 % per annum . '' 
According to Chinese customs figures , import growth has slowed in recent months , dropping to 16 % in July and 7.1 % in August from the year-earlier periods , compared with an average growth rate of 26 % in the first half . 
But before import growth slowed , China 's buying spree in the first half already had taken its toll on foreign-exchange reserves . 
The $ 14 billion level in June marked a drop from $ 19 billion at the end of April . 
China 's last big import binge sent reserves tumbling to $ 10.6 billion in June 1985 from $ 16.6 billion the previous September . 
China might stave off a crisis if it acts as forcefully as it did to arrest the 1985 decline , when Beijing slammed the brakes on foreign-exchange spending and devalued the currency . 
But this time , China faces a more difficult battle because of economic forces that have come into play since the Tiananmen Square killings June 4 . 
For example , China 's hard-currency income is expected to suffer from the big drop in tourist arrivals since June 4 . 
Revenue from tourism this year is projected to total $ 1.3 billion , down from $ 2.2 billion last year . 
Because of this and the huge trade gap , the deficit in China 's current account , which measures trade in goods and services plus certain unilateral transfers of funds , is expected to widen sharply from the $ 3.8 billion deficit last year . 
The Western government report suggests a number of scenarios for China 's current-account balance , two of which are considered most likely . 
In one , imports and exports continue to grow at the respective average rates of 25 % and 5 % recorded during the first seven months , and the current-account deficit widens to $ 13.1 billion . 
In 1985 , China had a record deficit of $ 11.4 billion . 
The other scenario assumes that Beijing takes effective actions to curb imports in the coming months . 
In this case , China would still finish the year with a current-account deficit of $ 8.7 billion , based on projections that imports for all of this year grow 20 % and exports 10 % . 
If China were still on good terms with foreign lenders , it might be able to stem the drain on its foreign-exchange reserves by using some loan funds to offset the current-account deficit . 
But since June , foreign bankers led by international financial institutions have virtually suspended their new loans to China . 
Even if borrowing resumes , commercial bankers are n't expected to lend as much as before . 
In addition , economists are forecasting a slowdown in foreign direct investments as businessmen become increasingly wary of China 's deteriorating political and economic environment . 
On top of all this , foreign-debt repayments are expected to peak in 1991 to 1992 . 
With less capital coming in , China 's balance of payments would suffer . 
The Western government report 's first scenario assumes a 30 % reduction in foreign borrowing and a 5 % contraction in foreign direct investment . 
In the second , foreign borrowing is projected to grow 10 % and investment to drop 10 % . 
But in either case , the report says , China 's balance of payments would rapidly dry up foreign reserves , which are used to finance the imbalance . 
In the first scenario , the reserves would be exhausted next year , and in the second they would be wiped out in 1991 . 
Roche Holding AG , parent of the Swiss chemical and pharmaceutical group , said its group sales rose 22 % in the first nine months of the year to 7.32 billion francs ( $ 4.51 billion ) . 
The company reported good gains in all of its divisions . 
Roche also said it expects a `` considerable rise '' in 1989 group profit from the 641.5 million-franc ( $ 396 million ) net in 1988 . 
New Canaan Investments Inc. said it closed the acquisition of Carr-Lowrey Glass Co. from Newell Co. , a Freeport , Ill. , maker of do-it-yourself home products . 
Terms were n't disclosed . 
Carr-Lowrey , a maker of glass bottles for the cosmetics and toiletries industries , had sales last year of about $ 40 million . 
New Canaan Investments is a closely held investment partnership with interests primarily in the packaging industry . 
Ralph Brown was 31,000 feet over Minnesota when both jets on his Falcon 20 flamed out . 
At 18,000 feet , he says , he and his co-pilot `` were looking for an interstate or a cornfield '' to land . 
At 13,000 feet , the engines restarted . 
But knowing that mechanics would probably ground him for repairs , Mr. Brown skipped his stop in nearby Chicago and set course to get his load -- a few hundred parcels -- to the Memphis package-sorting hub on time . 
Had he been a little less gung-ho , `` I 'd have gotten the thing on the ground and headed for the nearest bar , '' Mr. Brown says . 
But he flies for Federal Express Corp. , perhaps the closest thing in corporate America to the Green Berets . 
Federal 's employees work long hours and seem to thrive on the stress of racing the clock . 
Like Mr. Brown , they sometimes go to surprising lengths to meet that overarching corporate goal : delivering the goods on time . 
They are a tribute to Federal 's management which , since the company 's founding 16 years ago , has had its way with its work force -- an unusual feat in the contentious transportation industry . 
That may soon change . 
This month , Federal 's 2,048 pilots , including some 961 acquired along with Tiger International Inc. in February , will decide whether to elect the powerful Air Line Pilots Association as their bargaining agent . 
The election , which would bring the first major union to Federal 's U.S. operations , has pitted new hires against devoted veterans such as Mr. Brown . 
It has also rattled Federal 's strongly anti-union management , which is already contending with melding far-flung operations and with falling profits . 
`` A union , sooner or later , has to have an adversary , and it has to have a victory , '' Frederick W. Smith , Federal 's chairman and chief executive , says with disdain . 
`` In our formula , we do n't have any losers except the competition . '' 
What managers really fear is that the pro-union movement could spread beyond the pilots . 
Under federal transportation law , a government mediator is attempting to reconcile the melding of Tiger 's job classifications into Federal 's . 
Depending on the outcome , the merged company may face union elections this fall among airplane mechanics , ramp workers , stock clerks and flight dispatchers . 
These groups constitute up to 10 % of its work force . 
`` Unions would have a profound effect on the whole culture of the company , '' says Bernard La Londe , a professor at Ohio State University at Columbus and a Federal consultant . 
That culture , carefully crafted by Mr. Smith , leaves little , if any , room for unions . 
Since founding the company , the charismatic Vietnam vet , who is still only 46 years old , has fostered an ethos of combat . 
Flights are `` missions . '' 
Mr. Smith 's managers have , at times , been called `` Ho Chi Minh 's Guerrillas . '' 
The Bravo Zulu award , the Navy accolade for a `` job well done , '' is bestowed on Federal 's workers who surpass the call of duty . 
Competitors are known as the `` enemy . '' 
To reinforce employees ' dedication , Mr. Smith pays well . 
He also lets workers vent steam through an elaborate grievance procedure and , as a perk , fly free in empty cockpit seats . 
He gives pep talks in periodic `` family briefings '' beamed internationally on `` FXTV , '' the company 's own television network . 
And , with many of his 70,000 workers , Mr. Smith 's damn-the-torpedoes attitude has caught on . 
James Cleveland , a courier who earned a Bravo Zulu for figuring out how to get a major customer 's 1,100-parcel-a-week load to its doorstep by 8 a.m. , considers himself far more than a courier . 
`` We do n't just hand the customer the package . 
That 's just the beginning , '' he says . 
`` In essence , we run the show . '' 
David Sanders , a longtime pilot , bristles at the mere suggestion that a union might tamper with his flight schedule . 
`` This is America , '' he says . 
`` Nobody has the right to tell me how much I can work . '' 
Such attitudes have given Federal flexibility , not only to rapidly implement new technology but to keep its work force extraordinarily lean . 
The company deliberately understaffs , stretching employees ' schedules to the limit . 
But though couriers work as many as 60 hours a week during the autumn rush , they leave early during slack times while still being assured of a minimum paycheck . 
Pilots , as well , routinely fly overtime to ensure that none are furloughed during seasonal lows . 
The operational freedom has also given Federal a leg up on archrival United Parcel Service Inc. , the nation 's largest employer of United Brotherhood of Teamsters members . 
UPS wo n't discuss its labor practices , but , according to Mr. Cleveland , a former UPS employee , and others , union work rules prohibit UPS drivers from doing more than carrying packages between customers and their vans . 
Because UPS drivers are n't permitted to load their own vehicles at the depot , say these couriers , packages often get buried in the load and are delivered late . 
Labor problems are the last thing Mr. Smith needs right now . 
Although the Tiger acquisition has brought Federal a long way toward becoming the global player it wants to be , it also has brought problems . 
It more than doubled Federal 's long-term debt to $ 1.9 billion , thrust the company into unknown territory -- heavy cargo -- and suddenly expanded its landing rights to 21 countries from four . 
Federal , on its own , had n't been doing very well overseas . 
It had hemorrhaged in its attempt to get into Asia , where treaty restrictions forced it to fly some planes half-empty on certain routes . 
On routes to South America , the company had no backup jets to ensure delivery when planes were grounded . 
In Europe , business suffered as Federal bought several local companies , only to have the managers quit . 
These and other problems squeezed Federal 's profit margins last year to 8 % , down from more than 13 % annually in the first half of the decade . 
Earnings have plummeted , too , in each of the past three quarters . 
In the fiscal first period ended Aug. 31 , profit fell 54 % to $ 30.4 million , or 58 cents a share , mostly because of the Tiger merger , Federal says . 
Federal 's stock price , however , has held up well , driven in part by the general run-up of airline stocks , analysts say . 
Since trading as low as $ 42.25 a share in May , Federal 's shares have rallied as high as $ 57.87 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
They closed Friday at $ 53.25 , down 50 cents on the day . 
There 's a certain irony in the fact that Federal Express faces its first union problems as a result of its Tiger purchase . 
Tiger itself was founded by a band of gungho airmen who had airlifted supplies `` over the Hump '' from India to China during World War II . 
In the early 1970s , Mr. Smith modeled his fledgling company on Tiger 's innovation of hub-and-spoke and containerized-cargo operations . 
But from early on , Tiger 's workers unionized , while Federal 's never have . 
Federal Express officials acknowledge mistakes in their drive overseas but say it will pay off eventually . 
Analysts expect Federal 's earnings to improve again in its fiscal third quarter ending Feb. 28 , when the company should begin benefiting from Tiger 's extra flights , back-up planes and landing rights . 
Until then , they expect the cost of integrating the two carriers to continue crimping profits . 
For now , the union issue is the most nettlesome of Federal 's Tiger problems , management believes . 
Although encouraging dialogue between managers and workers , Mr. Smith does n't countenance what he considers insubordination . 
When a large group of pilots once signed petitions opposing work-rule and compensation changes , he called a meeting in a company hangar and dressed them down for challenging his authority . 
He then made most of the changes , pilots say . 
That sort of approach , however , has n't worked since the addition of Tiger . 
Its 6,500 workers , who had battled Tiger 's management for years over givebacks , were union members until the day of the merger , when most of their unions were automatically decertified . 
Soon after the merger , moreover , Federal 's management asked Tiger 's pilots to sign an agreement stating that they could be fired any time , without cause or notice . 
When the pilots refused , the company retracted it . 
Mr. Smith angered Federal 's pilots , too . 
In his haste to seal the deal with Tiger Chairman Saul Steinberg last August , Mr. Smith ignored a promise that he had made to his own pilots three years ago : that any fliers acquired in future mergers would be `` end-tailed '' -- put at the bottom of the pilot seniority list that determines work schedules , pay and career options . 
The Tiger merger agreement stipulated that the lists be combined on the basis of tenure . 
Mr. Smith is trying hard to allay the anger . 
And even some pro-union pilots say his charisma and popularity among the many former military fliers could be tough to beat . 
`` A lot of people are identifying a vote for representation as a vote against Fred Smith , '' says J.X. Gollich , a Tiger-turned-Federal pilot and union activist . 
Mr. Smith and other top Federal executives have met with Tiger workers in Los Angeles , Ohio , New York , Alaska , Asia and Europe . 
Recently , they have appeared every few weeks in talk-show type videos , countering pro-union arguments . 
In one video , Mr. Smith defended his agreement to merge the pilot-seniority lists . 
He said Mr. Steinberg had insisted that the merger talks move quickly . 
Regulators , as well , might have quashed the deal if Tiger 's pilots had n't been protected , he said . 
Furthermore , Mr. Smith added , `` our contract with our pilots says that we will manage our fleet operations with their advice . 
It does n't give any particular group the ability to veto change . '' 
Already , the fight has been costly . 
The seniority-list controversy , along with the job-classification dispute , has been turned over to the mediator . 
Meanwhile , the company is operating with two separate pilot groups and seniority lists , and that is costing Federal `` a big number , '' says James Barksdale , executive vice president and chief operating officer . 
The issue has also cost Federal management a lot of good will among its old pilots . 
`` They were willing to mistreat us because we had n't shown any moxie , any resistance , '' says William Queenan , a DC-10 pilot and 14-year Federal veteran . 
Adds John Poag , a 727 captain and past chairman of the company-sponsored Flight Advisory Board : `` They 've made all these magnanimous gestures to the Flying Tiger pilots , and for us , nothing . '' 
Such animosity could prove pivotal in the union vote . 
A large majority of the 961 former Tiger fliers support the union , according to a union study . 
But though most of the 1,087 Federal pilots are believed opposed , it is unclear just how much their loyalty to Mr. Smith has been eroded . 
The fight has turned ugly and , among pilots at least , has shattered the esprit de corps that Mr. Smith worked so hard to build . 
Anti-union pilots have held ballot-burning parties . 
Some younger pilots say they have had to endure anti-union harangues by senior pilots while flying across the country . 
And for now , at least , the competition is n't the only enemy . 
Barney Barnhardt , a 727 captain and leader of the pro-union forces , said he has received two anonymous death threats and been challenged to a fight with tire irons by a colleague . 
`` The pilots are either for us or extremely against us , '' he says with a sigh . 
Harsco Corp. said it obtained a $ 33.1 million export order for armored recovery vehicles and related support equipment . 
Harsco declined to say what country placed the order . 
The company said it received an order for 23 of the vehicles , which retrieve tanks and other heavy-tracked vehicles when they break down or are damaged , and an option for 16 more . 
Delivery is to begin in early 1991 . 
Harsco produces products for defense , industrial , commercial and construction markets . 
The Senate convicted U.S. District Judge Alcee Hastings of Florida of eight impeachment articles , removing the 53-year-old judge from his $ 89,500-a-year , lifetime job . 
Mr. Hastings 's case was particularly nettlesome because it marked the first time a federal official was impeached and removed from office on charges of which a jury had acquitted him . 
In 1983 , Mr. Hastings was found not guilty of accepting a $ 150,000 bribe in a case before him , the central charge on which the Senate convicted him . 
He was only the sixth federal judge ever ousted from office after an impeachment trial . 
With no floor debate , the Senate on Friday voted 69-26 to convict Mr. Hastings of perjury and conspiring to accept a bribe , five votes more than needed . 
Conviction on any single impeachment article was enough to remove Judge Hastings from office . 
He was found not guilty of three charges , involving accusations that he had improperly disclosed information about a sensitive , government investigation . 
The Senate did n't vote on six lesser charges . 
Although Mr. Hastings had been acquitted by a jury , lawmakers handling the prosecution in Congress had argued that the purpose of impeachment is n't to punish an individual . 
Instead , they argued that impeachment aims to protect public institutions from people who have abused their positions of trust , irrespective of the outcome of prior criminal or civil cases . 
Mr. Hastings faced the senators and sat impassively during the first two roll-call votes , then quickly left the chamber . 
In an impromptu news conference on the Capitol steps , he denounced the senators ' action . 
`` Their opinion is devoid of the wisdom of the forefathers ' teaching regarding impeachment , '' Mr. Hastings said . 
For the future , he said he would run for governor of Florida . 
Mr. Hastings was appointed to the federal bench by President Carter in 1979 and was one of the few black federal judges in the country . 
While he packed the Senate gallery with his supporters during some of the impeachment trial , most civil rights groups kept their distance from his case . 
Following the impeachment conviction , Dr. Benjamin Hooks , executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People , issued a restrained statement , warning that the Hastings case could set a `` dangerous precedent , '' but adding , `` We must respect the considered judgment of the Senate . 
When last we left him , FBI Agent Nick Mancuso had solved a murder mystery , unraveled a Washington political scandal , and racked up some pretty good ratings numbers in the miniseries `` Favorite Son . '' 
What next for the crusty FBI agent with the heart of gold ? 
A spinoff series , of course . 
There are plenty of worse inspirations for shows -- and most of them had already made the fall lineup : 
a nun raising some lovable orphans . 
A den mother raising some lovable teen models . 
A bunch of tans and bathing suits posing as lovable lifeguards . 
In that context , Robert Loggia 's riveting performance as the unlovable -- even crotchety -- veteran agent seems a better franchise for a series than most . 
Week by week on `` Mancuso FBI '' ( NBC , Fridays , 10 p.m . ET ) , he pokes around the crime styles of the rich , famous and powerful of the Washington scene -- a loose cannon on deck at the FBI . 
Over the first few weeks , `` Mancuso FBI '' has sprung straight from the headlines , which is either a commendable stab at topicality , or a lack of imagination , or both . 
The opening show featured a secretary of defense designate accused of womanizing ( a la John Tower ) . 
When his secretary is found floating dead in the pol 's pool , Mancuso is called in to investigate . 
Last week , a young black girl claimed she had been raped by a white police officer ( a la Tawana Brawley ) . 
In this week 's show , there 's an unsafe nuclear weaponsmaking facility ( a la Rocky Flats ) . 
Along the way , we 're introduced to the supporting cast : a blond bombshell secretary ( Randi Brazen -- her real name , honest ) , a scheming young boss ( Fredric Lehne ) , another blonde bombshell who 's also an idealistic lawyer ( Lindsay Frost ) , and a forensics expert ( Charles Siebert ) . 
If all of this seems a little stale , it 's redeemed in part by some tricky plot twists : 
The usual suspects are found to be guilty , then not guilty , then guilty -- but of a different crime . 
( In last week 's rape case , for example , the girl turns out to have been a victim of incest , and the biggest villains are the politicians who exploit the case . ) 
Most of all though , the show is redeemed by the character of Mancuso . 
What makes the veteran FBI man so endearing is his hard-bitten cynicism -- earned , we discover , when he was assigned to the civil rights movement back in the 1960s . 
He was n't protecting the Freedom Marchers ; he was tailing them as subversives . 
This is not the `` Mississippi Burning '' scenario that thrills his young colleagues : `` Kid , you 've been reading Classic Comics too long , '' Mancuso says . 
`` Back in 1964 , the FBI had five black agents . 
Three were chauffeurs for J. Edgar Hoover , and two cleaned his house . '' 
At the core of Mr. Loggia 's Mancuso is his world-weary truculence . 
He describes a reporter as `` Miss First Amendment . '' 
He describes a drowned corpse as `` Esther Williams . '' 
And when he 's told `` Try a little tenderness , '' he shoots back `` I 'm going home to try a little linguine . '' 
Yet for all his cynicism , he 's at heart a closet idealist , a softy with a secret crush on truth , justice and the American Way . 
He 's the kind of guy who rescues trampled flags . 
If `` Mancuso FBI '' has an intriguing central character , it also has a major flaw : 
It 's wildly overwritten . 
Executive Producers Steve Sohmer and Jeff Bleckner ( and writer / producers Ken Solarz and Steve Bello ) have revved this show up to the breaking point . 
To start , there 's always a crisis -- and someone always worries , `` What if the press gets a hold of this ? '' 
At least once an episode we see protestors marching around screaming slogans . 
At least once Mancuso 's boss yells `` In here -- now , '' and proceeds to dress his investigator down : 
`` You are a dinosaur ... a hangover in a $ 10 suit ... 
One more word and you are out on a park bench , mister . '' 
Finally , of course , the boss gives in , but he 's still yelling : `` I find myself explaining anything to Teddy Kennedy , you 'll be chasing stolen cars in Anchorage . '' 
In fact , throughout `` Mancuso FBI , '' we do n't get words or lines -- we get speeches . 
Witnesses shout , scream , pontificate : `` ... a dream that the planet could be saved from itself and from the sadistic dumb creatures who try to tear down every decent man who raises his voice . '' 
And Mancuso himself is investigating at the top of his lungs : `` How the hell can you live with yourself ? '' he erupts at a politician . 
`` You twist people 's trust . 
You built your career on prejudice and hate . 
The scars will be here years after the polls close . '' 
In each show , Mancuso gets to unleash similar harangues : 
`` Where the hell are they gon na live when people like you turn the world into a big toxic waste dump ? 
You 're the real criminal here ... and what you did was n't just a murder -- it was a crime against humanity . '' 
And , at least once a show , someone delivers the line `` Get off that soapbox . '' 
Now that 's advice the writers should take to heart . 
They have a series with a good character , some interesting , even occasionally surprising plot lines , and they 're ruining it . 
Why , when a key witness disappears , does Mancuso trash her apartment , tearing down drapes , smashing walls ? 
It 's a bizarre and totally inappropriate reaction , all to add more pizzazz to a script that 's already overdosing on pizzazz . 
That 's not plot . 
That 's not character . 
That 's hyperventilating . 
There is a scene at the end of the first week 's show where Mancuso attends the unveiling of the memorial to his dead partner David . 
Asked to say a few words , he pulls out his crumpled piece of paper and tries to talk , but he 's too choked up to get the words out . 
He bangs on the piece of paper in frustration , then turns and walks away . 
It was a profoundly moving moment for series television , and Robert Loggia 's acting resonated in the silence . 
There 's a pretty good program inside all the noise of `` Mancuso FBI . '' 
If the show 's creators could just let themselves be quiet for a little , they might just hear it . 
With a Twist of the Wrist Boys with tops , and Frisbee tossers , And P.R. types with bees in their bonnet , Have a goal in common , all of them try To put the right spin on it . 
-- George O. Ludcke . 
Net Gain 
Investment letters now abound , I really like to read them ; If I peruse enough , I 've found I 've no time left to heed them ! 
-- Bern Sharfman . 
Daffynition 
TV evangelist : salesparson . 
-- Marguerite Whitley May . 
Texaco Inc. has purchased an oil-producing company in Texas for $ 476.5 million , its first major acquisition since its legal brawl with Pennzoil Co. began more than four years ago . 
The White Plains , N.Y. , oil company said Friday that it had acquired Tana Production Corp. , a subsidiary of TRT Energy Holdings Inc. , for $ 95.1 million in cash , with the rest to be paid in shares of a new , non-voting issue of preferred stock . 
Tana , which holds properties in 17 oil and gas fields in south Texas , will provide Texaco with mostly gas reserves . 
The fields contain recoverable reserves of 435 billion cubic feet of natural gas and four million barrels of oil . 
`` This acquisition is another indication of Texaco 's commitment to increase the company 's reserve base , '' said Chief Executive Officer James W. Kinnear . 
Texaco has also been attempting to sell oil properties . 
At least two years ago , the company put 60 million barrels of oil reserves on the block . 
They were either too small or uneconomic to maintain , the company said . 
Not all of those parcels have yet been sold . 
Texaco acquired Tana before it completed those sales because Tana 's properties are high quality and near other fields Texaco already owns , a company spokeswoman said . 
Texaco , like many other oil companies , has been struggling to replace its falling oil and gas reserves . 
Texaco 's situation had become particularly complex because much of its effort had for years been focused on its brawl with Pennzoil and then on New York investor Carl C. Icahn 's attempt to take over the company . 
Pennzoil had sued Texaco for improperly interfering with its acquisition of a portion of Getty Oil Co . 
Eventually , Texaco , which was forced into bankruptcy proceedings by that litigation , settled its fight with Pennzoil for $ 3 billion in 1986 . 
Mr. Icahn , who played a key role in the settlement and attempted subsequently to take control of the company , sold his stake in Texaco just last summer . 
Completion of Texaco 's acquisition of Tana is subject to government approval under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act . 
CRI Inc. said it reduced the estimated cash distribution for its Capital Housing and Mortgage Partners Inc. trust to between 71 cents and 74 cents a share , from between 75 cents and 80 cents , for the year ending June 9 , 1990 . 
The change in expected cash distributions from the Champs real estate investment trust stems from a revised estimate of administrative costs , said Jay R. Cohen , Champs executive vice president . 
CRI , which sponsors Champs , is a world-wide real estate investment firm . 
H&R BLOCK Inc. had net income of $ 100.2 million , or $ 1.90 a share , in the fiscal year ended April 30 . 
The figure was incorrectly shown as a net loss in a chart accompanying Friday 's Heard on the Street column . 
Your Oct. 2 article on Daniel Yankelovich cited the quote `` A good name is better than great riches '' as being from Cervantes ' `` Don Quixote . '' 
Actually , Cervantes borrowed that quote from a writer of some 25 centuries earlier : Israel 's King Solomon wrote those words in the Book of Proverbs ( 22:1 ) . 
Michael E. Hill 
Japan had an unadjusted trade surplus of $ 1.82 billion for the first 10 days of October , down from $ 3.16 billion a year earlier , the Finance Ministry said . 
The latest drop shows the narrowing in the nation 's trade gap reflected in successive full monthly reports is continuing . 
The report follows five-consecutive declines in full monthly figures . 
Imports rose sharply in the period , to $ 5.19 billion from $ 4.04 billion a year earlier , a change of 28 % . 
Exports during the period were $ 7.01 billion , 2.6 % below $ 7.20 billion a year ago . 
Groupe AG 's chairman said the Belgian insurer is prepared to give up some of its independence to a white knight if necessary to repel a raider . 
Amid heavy buying of shares in Belgium 's largest insurer , Maurice Lippens also warned in an interview that a white knight , in buying out a raider , could leave speculators with big losses on their AG stock . 
Since the beginning of the year , the stock has nearly doubled , giving AG a market value of about 105 billion Belgian francs ( $ 2.7 billion ) . 
The most likely white knight would be Societe Generale de Belgique S.A. , which already owns 18 % of AG and which itself is controlled by Cie . Financiere de Suez , the acquisitive French financial conglomerate . 
But Mr. Lippens said a rescue also could involve Asahi Mutual Life Insurance Co. , which owns 5 % of AG . 
AG is hardly alone in its anxiety . 
A rambunctious shake-up is quickly reshaping Europe 's once-stately insurance business . 
Worried by European Community directives that will remove many of the barriers to cross-border insurance services , starting in mid-1990 , insurers are rushing to find partners and preparing for price wars . 
In West Germany and the Netherlands , insurers are flirting with banks . 
In France , Suez and Axa-Midi Assurances S.A. both have been on the prowl for giant acquisitions ; Suez last month acquired control of Groupe Victoire , the sixth-largest European insurance company , after a takeover battle with Cie . Industrielle . 
Mr. Lippens said the volume of shares changing hands has grown significantly since mid-September . 
But he estimated that a raider would have been able to amass no more than 4 % of the shares in recent months . 
Aside from exploring plans for joint ventures or acquisitions , Mr. Lippens has called top managers of companies rumored as potential raiders -- among them , Axa-Midi , Union des Assurances de Paris and Suez , all based in France . 
They have all `` very clearly stated that they have not acquired and are not acquiring shares of AG , '' he said . 
Any raider would find it hard to crack AG 's battlements . 
A `` syndicate '' of shareholders holds just under 50 % of AG , Mr. Lippens said , and members have agreed to give one another the right of first refusal should they sell any AG shares . 
Aside from Generale de Belgique and Asahi , the syndicate includes Antwerpsche Hypotheekkas , a Belgian savings bank , and various family interests . 
A Generale spokesman confirmed that the giant Belgian holding company would be willing to raise its stake in AG should a raider seek control . 
Asahi officials could n't be reached for comment . 
Even without bid talk , this year 's surge in prices for Brussels real estate has excited interest in AG . 
The company says those holdings constitute the third-biggest real-estate portfolio in Belgium . 
With the dust settling from the failed coup attempt in Panama , one of the many lingering questions the Bush administration will ponder is this : Is the National Security Council staff big enough , and does it have enough clout , to do its job of coordinating foreign policy ? 
President Bush 's national security adviser , Lt. Gen. Brent Scowcroft , came into office in January intent on making the NSC staff leaner and more disciplined than it had been during the Reagan administration . 
Gen. Scowcroft was a member of the Tower Commission , which investigated the Iran-Contra affair . 
He was all too aware of how a large , inadequately supervised NSC staff had spun out of control and nearly wrecked President Reagan 's second term . 
So , following both the style he pursued as President Ford 's national security adviser and the recommendations of the Tower Commission , Gen. Scowcroft has pruned the NSC staff and tried to ensure that it sticks to its assigned tasks -- namely , gathering the views of the State Department , Pentagon and intelligence community ; serving as an honest broker in distilling that information for the president and then making sure presidential decisions are carried out . 
The Tower Commission specifically said that the NSC staff should be `` small '' and warned against letting `` energetic self-starters '' like Lt. Col. Oliver North strike out on their own rather than leaving the day-to-day execution of policies to the State Department , Pentagon or Central Intelligence Agency . 
However , the Panama episode has raised questions about whether the NSC staff is sufficiently big , diverse and powerful to coordinate U.S. policy on tough issues . 
During the coup attempt and its aftermath , NSC staffers were `` stretched very thin , '' says one senior administration official . 
`` It 's a very small shop . '' 
Gen. Scowcroft does n't plan to increase the staff right now , but is weighing that possibility , the official adds . 
The NSC staff `` does n't have the horsepower that I believe is required to have an effective interagency process , '' says Frank Gaffney , a former Pentagon aide who now runs the Center for Security Policy , a conservative Washington think-tank . 
`` The problem with this administration , I think , is that by design it has greatly diminished , both in a physical sense and in a procedural sense , the role of the NSC . '' 
The National Security Council itself was established in 1947 because policy makers sensed a need , in an increasingly complex world , for a formal system within the White House to make sure that communications flowed smoothly between the president and the State Department , Pentagon and intelligence agencies . 
By law , the council includes the president , vice president and secretaries of state and defense . 
In practice , the director of central intelligence and chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff also serve as unofficial members . 
But the size , shape and role of the NSC staff have been left for each president and his national security adviser to decide . 
That task is one of Washington 's perennial problems . 
In the Bush White House , the size of the NSC 's staff of professional officers is down to about 50 from about 70 in 1987 , administration officials say . 
Administration officials insist that the size of the staff was n't a problem during the Panama crisis . 
But one clear problem during the coup attempt was that the NSC staffer most experienced in Latin America , Everett Briggs , was gone . 
He had just resigned , at least in part because of a feud with Assistant Secretary of State Bernard Aronson over the administration 's policy on Panama and support for Nicaragua 's Contra rebels . 
The absence of Mr. Briggs underscored the possible inadequacy of the current NSC staff . 
Both Gen. Scowcroft and his deputy , Robert Gates , are experts in U.S.-Soviet affairs . 
Gen. Scowcroft is particularly well-versed in arms control , and Mr. Gates has spent years studying Soviet politics and society . 
Both have become confidants of President Bush . 
But neither has an extensive background in Latin America , the Middle East or Asia . 
In those areas , the role of NSC staffers under them therefore have become more important . 
Gen. Scowcroft knows as well as anyone that one of the biggest dangers he faces is that NSC staffers working in relative anonymity will take over policy-making and operational tasks that are best left to bigger and more experienced State Department and Pentagon bureaus . 
But just as every previous NSC adviser has , Gen. Scowcroft now will have to mull at what point the NSC staff becomes too lean and too restrained . 
Japan 's wholesale prices in the first 10 days of October fell 0.3 % from the previous 10 days but rose 3.3 % from a year ago , the Bank of Japan said . 
The wholesale price index stood at 89.6 ( 1985 equals 100 ) . 
A former Sperry Corp. marketing executive , admitting his role in the Pentagon procurement scandal , pleaded guilty to bribery and conspiracy charges for helping funnel $ 400,000 to a midlevel Navy acquisition official during the early 1980s . 
Frank Lavelle , who at the time was the marketing director for Sperry in Clearwater , Fla. , admitted participating in a scheme to bribe Garland Tomlin , the Navy official . 
Mr. Tomlin , who left the Navy in 1985 , pleaded guilty earlier this year to related conspiracy , bribery and tax-evasion charges . 
The bribery scheme took place between 1982 and 1985 , according to documents filed by prosecutors in connection with Mr. Lavelle 's guilty plea in federal district court in Alexandria , Va . 
Sperry merged with Burroughs Corp. to become Unisys Corp. in late 1986 . 
Court documents filed by prosecutors indicate Mr. Tomlin tried to steer to Sperry a multimillion dollar contract to computerize maintenance of certain Navy electronics equiment . 
Mr. Tomlin , among other things , illegally provided Mr. Lavelle with inside information and documents intended to give Sperry an unfair advantage in the competition , the documents said . 
Sperry ultimately was eliminated from the competition without receiving the work . 
Documents filed by prosecutors also indicate that Mr. Lavelle and his fellow conspirators requested and obtained `` approval of the scheme '' from more-senior Sperry officials `` because the payment which { Mr . } Tomlin requested was so large . '' 
Charles Gardner , a former Unisys vice president , and James Neal , a former company consultant , have admitted participating in this and other bribery schemes . 
Unisys has said that all of the company officials who participated in improper activities have left the company . 
Mr. Lavelle faces a maximum of 20 years in jail and a $ 500,000 fine . 
The New York Stock Exchange said a seat was sold for $ 500,000 , unchanged from the sale Thursday . 
Seats are quoted at $ 430,000 bid and $ 525,000 asked . 
Bureaucrats may deserve their bad reputation , after all . 
Matthew Lesko , something of a professional defender of government , thought he had a sure-fire winner last summer when he offered $ 5,000 for the best `` verifiable story of 250 words or less about how a government bureaucrat helped you . '' 
He sent out thousands of news releases from his Kensington , Md. , office . 
He plugged the contest on Larry King 's radio show , on Pat Sajak 's television show and on the C-SPAN cable television network . 
He talked about it in every speech he made as he roamed the country promoting his books , which dispense handy how-to advice on using government information for fun and profit . 
Mr. Lesko figured he would be flooded with entries by now . 
After all , he says , `` we 've got like 15 million bureaucrats . '' 
And in addition to the $ 5,000 , he has promised the winner a `` My Favorite Bureaucrat '' plaque and offered each of two runners-up $ 500 . 
So far , though , Mr. Lesko has received only one entry . 
To make matters worse , the lone nomination came from another bureaucrat : A woman from the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance who nominated her boss . 
Mr. Lesko , who is making the rules as he goes , has determined that bureaucrats are eligible for nomination by other bureaucrats . 
But he says he would prefer to get nominations from rank-and-file folks . 
He admits that he has n't had much luck generating free publicity for his contest . 
Newspapers , including this one , have generally ignored his news releases . 
Talk show hosts quickly change the topic . 
But Mr. Lesko 's staff is beginning to wonder whether there is n't some larger phenomenon foiling the contest . 
`` Is the government not helping anybody ? '' asks Toni Murray , an assistant to Mr. Lesko . 
Mr. Lesko himself is n't yet prepared to accept that explanation . 
`` People hate to write , '' he says . 
`` Maybe people do n't believe I want to give this money away . '' 
Maybe Americans are just so annoyed with government that they are n't interested in admitting that bureaucrats come in handy once in a while . 
If he sponsored a contest on how a bureaucrat mishandled something , Mr. Lesko admits , `` I 'd get 5,000 entries . '' 
Now there 's an idea . 
Ford Motor Co. and Saab-Scania AB of Sweden broke off talks about a possible alliance after Ford officials concluded that the cost to modernize Saab 's car operations would outweigh the likely return . 
With the collapse of the talks Friday , European analysts expect Ford to intensify its pursuit of British luxury car maker Jaguar PLC , which is scrambling to fend off a hostile Ford bid by negotiating a friendly alliance with Ford 's archrival , General Motors Corp . 
Saab , meanwhile , is left to continue its search for an ally to shore up its sagging car business . 
Saab said last week it `` has had and will continue to have contacts with other manufacturers . '' 
Among the possible suitors is Italy 's Fiat S.p . A , analysts said last week . 
Ford and Saab officials declined to elaborate publicly on the announcement Friday that their negotiations failed to yield an agreement `` that could make long-term business sense to both parties . '' 
Individuals close to the Ford side of the negotiations said late last week that the No. 2 U.S. auto maker lost interest as it became clear that the Swedish auto maker 's automotive operations had little to offer in the way of image or technology . 
Ford originally had seen a Saab alliance as a way to expand its presence in the European and U.S. luxury car markets . 
In addition , Ford and Saab had discussed a possible link between their heavy truck operations . 
But the talks on a heavy truck alliance apparently did n't go far . 
Some European analysts speculated that officials of Saab 's highly profitable Scania truck operation balked at surrendering any of their autonomy . 
Meanwhile , Ford officials became convinced they could n't expect to recover the investment it would require to make Saab 's cars competitive in the increasingly crowded luxury market . 
Saab 's problems were underscored Friday when the company announced that its car division had a 1.2 billion kronor ( $ 186.1 million ) loss during the first eight months of this year , slightly worse than Saab-Scania had forecast in its first-half report last month . 
Overall , Saab-Scania 's pretax profit during the first eight months of the year plunged 48.9 % to 1 billion Swedish kronor ( $ 155.1 million ) from 1.96 billion kronor ( $ 303.9 million ) a year earlier . 
Industry analysts in Europe said the most likely suitor for Saab now is Fiat . 
Saab and Fiat have worked together in the past , in one case developing jointly a new auto chassis that became the foundation of Saab 's 9000 model , Fiat 's Croma and Lancia 's Thema . 
Last month , Saab-Scania Chief Executive Georg Karnsund said his company has had talks with Fiat about a broader alliance . 
But the talks yielded `` nothing so advanced that we needed to make a public announcement about it , '' he said . 
As for Ford , analysts expect the end of the Saab play will allow the U.S. auto maker to focus its resources on the intensifying struggle with GM for a stake in Jaguar . 
The failure of the Saab talks `` makes it even more crucial for { Ford } to be victorious '' in the Jaguar contest , said Stephen Reitman , European auto industry analyst at UBS-Phillips & Drew in London . 
Ford faces an uphill fight for Jaguar , however . 
Jaguar executives said last week they expect to have a friendly alliance with GM wrapped up by the end of the month . 
GM , meanwhile , is hosting a delegation of members of the British Parliament who are touring the auto maker 's headquarter operations in Detroit . 
A GM spokesman said the visit is n't connected to the Jaguar situation . 
But Ford clearly views Jaguar as a prize worth fighting for , since the company 's gilded brand image would give Ford a badly needed leg up in the high end of the luxury markets in both Europe and the U.S. . 
Last week , Ford encountered a setback in its effort to broaden its U.S. luxury offerings when it was forced to abandon a four-year-old effort to market its German-built Scorpio sedan in the U.S. as a luxury import under the Merkur brand name . 
So despite the GM-Jaguar romance , analysts say Ford by last Friday had boosted its Jaguar holding to about 11 % of the luxury auto maker 's shares outstanding from 10.4 % early last week . 
About 5.4 million Jaguar shares changed hands in active trading on London 's stock exchange Friday , and Jaguar shares moved up 19 pence to 696 pence ( $ 11 ) . 
On the U.S. over-the-counter market , Jaguar 's American depositary receipts rose 12.5 cents to $ 11.125 . 
Joann S. Lublin contributed to this article . 
The Dallas Cowboys are looking at a long-yardage situation , struggling to pull ahead of the Atlanta Falcons . 
Up in his stadium box , their new and controversial owner , Jerral `` Jerry '' Jones , watches anxiously as the team bounds up to the scrimmage line . 
Mr. Jones takes heart . 
There in the center of the pack is quarterback Troy Aikman , the key to the Cowboys ' comeback strategy . 
So key , in fact , that Mr. Jones signed him in April for $ 11.4 million over the next six years -- a record for a rookie . 
`` He 's a genuine Wheaties-box athlete , '' gushes Mr. Jones . 
With three minutes left on the clock , Mr. Aikman takes the snap , steps back and fires a 21-yard pass -- straight into the hands of an Atlanta defensive back . 
The crowd groans , Mr. Jones shakes his head , the Cowboys lose the game . 
A few days after that Sept. 17 game , Mr. Aikman broke a finger , sidelining him for weeks . 
Ah , the glamour of professional sports . 
For Mr. Jones , losing his quarterback temporarily was just the latest in a string of setbacks that has beset the Dallas Cowboys -- and , this year , much of the National Football League . 
Once fat and happy , the Cowboys now are losing games , fans and money . 
Last year , the team ended up $ 2 million in the red on $ 30 million in revenue . 
It has some of the highest costs in the league . 
Its attendance is off 23 % from six years ago . 
At the very least , Mr. Jones , who cultivates the society circuit as eagerly as his bench , can take comfort in one fact : These days , he is n't alone . 
Nearly half the owners of the 28 National Football League teams are losing money , the result of flat attendance , aging stadiums and -- more than anything -- skyrocketing salaries for star players like Mr. Aikman . 
Last year , the top 12 players on each NFL team took home an average $ 536,000 , a figure comparable to baseball and higher than in basketball . 
First-round draft picks have done even better : Average salaries and bonuses for them rose to $ 685,000 this year , up 44 % from 1987 . 
`` It 's a vicious circle , '' says Art Modell , owner of the Cleveland Browns . 
`` One team pays so much and the other pays more . 
We just do n't have that kind of income stream . '' 
All this is causing convulsions in professional football . 
Owners , largely complacent in the past , are now almost desperately looking for ways to lower costs and raise revenue -- embracing some revolutionary ideas in the process . 
Though not intentionally , the Cowboys ' Mr. Jones has come to represent this new breed of owner . 
Shortly after buying 66 % of the team from H.R. `` Bum '' Bright for $ 145 million , and mindful of the Cowboys ' ragged bottom line , the 47-year-old Mr. Jones set about his own round of team cuts . 
First , he unceremoniously sacked Tom Landry , the legendary coach who took the Cowboys to five Super Bowls and 20 consecutive winning seasons . 
In Dallas , Mr. Landry has a standing just shy of sainthood . 
Anti-Jones sentiment flooded the local press : `` A crude obnoxious hick , '' said one writer ; `` a real oink , '' said another ; `` Who in the hell does he think he is ? '' wrote a third . 
For Mr. Jones , it was just the beginning . 
He quickly cut the team 's bloated administrative staff by half , shut down a Cowboys-owned dance academy and , in July , announced plans to sell Valley Ranch , the team 's 30-acre practice camp and the most lavish training facility in the NFL . 
Mr. Jones calls the ranch `` the Pentagon of Sportdom . '' 
It is a maze of halls that connects film rooms , elaborate spas and weight-training centers that testify to a richer , more free-spending era . 
He likes to tell the yarn of how he got lost on the expansive ranch during an early visit , took refuge in an office and called the front desk for help . 
`` I said , ` Somebody come get me . 
I 'm at extension 29 . ' '' 
With a new day dawning on the sport , Mr. Jones does n't see a place for this sort of luxury . 
`` It 's just not cost efficient , '' he says . 
The place costs nearly $ 2 million a year to maintain . 
When he sells it , he says , the Cowboys will move to a more practical -- read affordable -- grass practice field near Texas Stadium . 
And as for Tom Landry , well , in Mr. Jones 's mind , he had played out his winning years . 
After posting losing seasons in each of the last three years , the Cowboys needed a change , he says . 
Football has long been Mr. Jones 's passion , both on and off the field . 
An Arkansas native , he started at guard on the undefeated 1964 University of Arkansas team that won a national championship . 
After college , he worked at his father 's insurance company in Little Rock , and in 1966 led an aborted attempt to buy the San Diego Chargers . 
Years later , with cash from the sale of the insurance company , he founded Arkoma Production Corp. , an oil and gas exploration company based in Little Rock . 
So it was n't surprising that Mr. Jones returned to his Arkansas roots when he went looking for a replacement for Mr. Landry . 
He tapped Jimmy Johnson , a teammate on the 1964 University of Arkansas squad and the head coach at the University of Miami , where he led the Hurricanes to five winning seasons and a national championship in 1987 . 
Whatever Mr. Johnson 's talents , in the hearts and minds of many Dallas fans , he is no Tom Landry . 
Seven games ( and , after a loss to the Kansas City Chiefs yesterday , seven losses ) into the season , the `` new '' Cowboys are n't doing any better than the old . 
In fact , the last time they played this badly was in 1960 , their opening season . 
Average attendance at their games , about 49,000 last year , continues flat . 
Mr. Jones is attacking the problem on several fronts . 
He continues to reshuffle the team , trading famed running back Herschel Walker to the Minnesota Vikings this month for a slew of players and future draft picks . 
To try to draw more fans , he has dropped end-zone ticket prices from $ 25 to $ 19 . 
But the general trend , given rising costs in the league , has been to raise prices , and Mr. Jones is expected to eventually follow suit . 
`` It 's simple , '' says Lamar Hunt , who owns the Kansas City Chiefs and last year raised ticket prices by $ 2.40 to an average $ 17 . 
`` If we did n't increase prices , we 'd be in the red . '' 
Mr. Jones has also beefed up his marketing staff to sell the 118 luxury suites topping Texas Stadium ( his deal with Bum Bright included operating rights for the stadium ) . 
The suites are air-conditioned , have wet bars and plush seating , and offer a clear view of the field -- all for a sale price of $ 475,000 to $ 1 million , depending on their size and location . 
Mr. Jones has been taking prospective suite owners onto the field during practice to let them rub elbows with players , and promises those who actually buy one of the rooms an insider 's look at the team 's strategy before game time . 
The sales job seems to be paying off : When he bought the team , only six of the suites had been sold . 
Today , 30 have . 
Gate receipts are only the Cowboys ' second largest source of cash . 
The biggest is the NFL 's contract with national television for broadcast of the league 's games . 
Last year , the Cowboys ' share of that pie came to $ 17.6 million . 
The team additionally earns between $ 2 million and $ 4 million for local radio and television broadcast rights . 
Mr. Jones is currently trying to jack up the price for those local rights . 
He is also trying to get more stations in Mexico , where the Cowboys have a following , to pick up the games . 
Mr. Jones , whose twangy voice and folksy ways belie an intense businessman who works 16-hour days , is resigned to the hefty salaries he pays his players these days . 
He calls the contracts `` critical to winning in the NFL '' and has played his part in the bidding wars . 
Besides signing Mr. Aikman to a sizable contract , Mr. Jones has agreed to pay rookie quarterback Steve Walsh $ 4.1 million over the next four years . 
This wage inflation is bleeding the NFL dry , the owners contend . 
Soon , only large corporations will be able to afford to buy and run football teams , predicts John J. Veatch Jr. , an investment banker with Salomon Brothers who handled the Cowboys sale . 
To tackle the problem , NFL owners have proposed setting a rookie wage scale to try to rein in salaries . 
Details of the plan , which would go into effect in 1993 , are sketchy , but each player would apparently be paid a base salary keyed to his position and ability . 
Bonuses would be paid based on playing time and performance . 
The NFL Players Association , meanwhile , contends that athletes are paid a wage commensurate with their ability to draw fans , and that some owners are in financial trouble because of poor business management , not players ' salaries . 
The owners are trying to boost profit in other ways , too . 
Many have launched promotions to attract new fans and are renegotiating dated stadium contracts . 
Most of the owners must pay up to 10 % of gross ticket sales for leases on stadiums they say are either too small or too old . 
In Chicago , for example , size is the issue . 
`` We have the worst lease in the NFL , '' contends Michael B. McCaskey , the president of the Chicago Bears and a grandson of George Halas , who founded the NFL 's predecessor organization . 
`` We 're in a metro area with millions of Bear fans , and only a small number can be accommodated . '' 
When the lease expires in 1999 , he says , `` It 's got to be changed . '' 
This year , the NFL also imposed an 80-player limit on teams going into training camp , down from 120 , in a move meant to trim payroll costs . 
And the league is trying to get more for its three-year national network contract , which expires after this season . 
The current contract pays the NFL $ 1.4 billion . 
Owners say they expect the league to demand a 50 % increase , despite the fact that televised football games have had lackluster ratings . 
An NFL spokesman also says the league will probably expand its offerings to cable TV companies like ESPN . 
The changes have n't come easy . 
Like the game of professional football , the NFL organization itself is in turmoil . 
The new breed of team owner , Mr. Jones included , has been fighting the NFL bureaucracy for a greater say in league affairs , and the battle has produced a form of organizational gridlock . 
In July , 11 NFL owners , almost all of them new , blocked an effort to install Jim Finks as a replacement for retiring league commissioner Pete Rozelle . 
Mr. Finks is perceived by some owners as a standard-bearer for the Old Guard . 
Earlier this month , another effort to choose a commissioner failed . 
The owners meet again tomorrow . 
For his part , Jerry Jones says he 's in the business for the long haul , and his work style seems to support that . 
He puts in busy six-day weeks ( excluding game days ) , and on one recent afternoon fielded questions , in the course of an hour , from a TV producer , his luxury-suite marketing manager , a disgruntled customer and a roomful of Arkansas reporters . 
To keep his schedule on track , he flies two personal secretaries in from Little Rock to augment his staff in Dallas . 
`` When I made this investment , I made it on a lifetime basis , '' he explains . 
`` I 'm not here to make money by reselling the team later on . 
While the Cowboys may not be the best investment now , I do n't accept they ca n't be in the future . '' 
Besides , to a large extent , Mr. Jones may already be getting what he wants out of the team , even though it keeps losing . 
Owning the Cowboys has bought him entree to a glitzy life that drilling for oil in Arkansas just did n't provide . 
There is the new private jet , the platoon of assistants , invitations to the best parties , and television appearances on shows such as `` Prime Time Live . '' 
A few weeks ago , Mr. Jones even entertained Elizabeth Taylor in his private suite at Texas Stadium . 
`` You 're in the catbird seat every day in this job , '' he says . 
How interestingly clever of Robert Goldberg to use the form of pretend advocacy journalism to explain his perception of `` Days of Rage '' in his television critique ( Leisure & Arts , Sept 11 ) . 
He chastises Jo Franklin-Trout for her inept presentation of advocacy journalism , judging her project as `` intellectually slipshod . '' 
Was not the title very clear ? 
One example he gives : `` She did n't ask '' ( why the Palestinian children are soldiers throwing stones ) . 
Really now , did she have to ask ? 
Were not the pictures and happenings , which have been continuing news headlines , answers enough ? 
Mr. Goldberg contends that even as `` propaganda '' the film fails because it presents only one view . 
Of course the Palestinians complain about their treatment ; of course the Israelis feel put upon . 
But his complaint that `` Days of Rage '' does n't contain balanced comments from Israelis about how badly the Palestinians are behaving is irrelevant . 
It 's like doing a documentary on apartheid and insisting that equal time be given to how terrific white South Africans are . 
This film did emphasize how long the Israeli / Palestinian stalemate has existed by tracing the conflict to the days of World War I when the British tried to guarantee both a Jewish state and a Palestinian state without specifying how it was to be done . 
Well , `` Days of Rage '' airing with before-and-after packaging , and after repeated delays , was a beginning . 
Every issue is multisided . 
This film attempts to show a side rarely seen in our media . 
Now we must endure a rash of critics who apparently wish to know details of one side only . 
Salaam . 
Shalom . 
Charlotte Carpenter Bainbridge Island , Wash . 
President Bush wants the Pentagon to get special treatment in coping with the across-the-board spending cuts that took effect last week . 
Mr. Bush asked Congress to raise to $ 6 billion from $ 3 billion the amount of money Defense Secretary Dick Cheney may shift among the Pentagon 's individual programs , projects and activities , allowing him to ease the pain that the Gramm-Rudman budget law was intended to inflict . 
If the request is approved by both the House and Senate , Mr. Cheney would need only permission from the White House Office of Management and Budget to move the money , according to Senate budget analysts . 
That would give the Pentagon flexibility that no other federal agency has . 
`` It 's simply a way of making the cuts less onerous for defense than they are for domestic programs , '' said Chairman James Sasser ( D. , Tenn . ) of the Senate Budget Committee , who said he would oppose the request . 
`` That is n't consistent with the kind of discipline that Gramm-Rudman is supposed to impose , '' he said . 
The president 's request did n't indicate how Mr. Cheney would shift the money . 
A Pentagon official said the request was made to give the department `` maximum flexibility '' to deal with the cuts . 
Last week , Budget Director Richard Darman structured the $ 16.1 billion spending reduction , half of which must come from defense , to `` impose a little bit more discipline '' by applying cuts to each individual program , project or activity in the budget . 
That would give agencies `` less ability ... to fudge over things , '' he told reporters . 
Under the deficit-reduction law , 4.3 % of the Pentagon 's money and 5.3 % of other agencies ' money has been canceled . 
Lawmakers are expected to try to restore the funds once a pending deficit-cutting measure has been signed into law . 
Rochester Telephone Corp. said it completed its purchase of Urban Telephone Corp. , of Clintonville , Wis. , the second-largest unaffiliated independent telephone company in that state . 
Rochester Telephone said the acquisition was made in an exchange of its common shares for all the shares of Urban Telephone , but a price was n't disclosed . 
Urban is the company 's first telephone subsidiary in Wisconsin . 
Since June , Rochester Telephone signed letters of intent to purchase three other Wisconsin firms . 
A bill that would permit the Securities and Exchange Commission to monitor the financial condition of securities firms ' holding companies is facing tough opposition from some Wall Street firms , which argue that the legislation is unnecessary . 
The legislation and other issues related to the stock market will be the focus of hearings this week by the House Telecommunications and Finance Subcommittee and the Senate Securities Subcommittee . 
Richard Breeden , the new chairman of the SEC , has n't taken a formal position on the bill , which would also require investors to disclose large trades and give the SEC additional authority during market emergencies . 
However , he recently told the Senate Banking Committee that he believes the agency should have explicit authority to monitor debt levels at holding companies and affiliates of broker-dealers , which are frequently used to issue bridge loans . 
The bridge loans are intended to provide temporary financing for acquisitions . 
Since such loans are often refinanced through the sale of high-risk , high-yield junk bonds , the recent woes of the junk-bond market have renewed concerns among regulators about the risks associated with Wall Street firms issuing bridge loans . 
But some Wall Street executives argue that such fears are unwarranted . 
In a July 6 letter to the Senate Securities Subcommittee , First Boston Corp. argued that the fact that no retail brokerage firm failed during the 1987 market crash demonstrates that current rules are adequate . 
First Boston , whose holding company , CS First Boston Group , is one of the larger issuers of bridge loans on Wall Street , said it is also concerned that once the SEC has the power to monitor holding companies , it will try to regulate their activities . 
`` The proposal , while well-intended , I think can be dangerously misleading because the likely consequence would be to weaken , rather than strengthen the control the SEC has exercised for 50 years over the financial adequacy and viability of broker-dealers , '' Michael Raoul-Duval , managing director of First Boston , said in an interview . 
The bill would `` divert scarce resources of the commission away from broker-dealers into areas which simply have no way of affecting broker-dealers , '' Mr. Raoul-Duval said . 
Sources in the industry and on Capitol Hill say a compromise that would placate the industry while addressing the SEC 's concerns may be possible . 
An aide to the Senate Securities Subcommittee says some legislators support the concept of risk disclosure , but adds : `` nobody is wedded to the language in the bill . '' 
Edward O'Brien , president of the Securities Industry Association , said that the securities-industry trade group opposes the bill as it is written but that it is `` hopeful a compromise can be reached to achieve the SEC 's goals . '' 
Mr. O'Brien will elaborate on the SIA 's position in testimony before the House Telecommunications and Finance Subcommittee this week , a spokesman said . 
This letter was inspired by David Asman 's Sept. 25 editorial-page article about Fidel Castro , `` Man in the Middle of Drug Trafficking . '' 
I 've organized a series of exchanges , exhibitions and other continuing projects between Cuban and American artists . 
In any matters between us and the Cubans there can be no simplicity , consequently I 've become familiar not only with Cuban art and artists , but also with Cuban bureaucrats and their counterparts in our own government . 
Despite levels of obstruction , incompetence and ensuing frustration of mythic proportion , these projects all remain , in my mind , valuable and well worth the effort . 
There is a simple reason for this : the Cuban people . 
Let me immediately put limits to whatever nostalgic notions that may intimate . 
Those `` people '' to whom I refer are not some heroic , indecipherable quantity ; they are artists , critics , taxi drivers , grandmothers , even some employees of the Ministry of Culture , all of whom share a deep belief in the original principles of the Cuban Revolution , spelled out in terms such as equality among all members of the society , reverence for education and creative expression , universal rights to health and livelihood , housing , etc . 
In fact , the generation of painters growing into maturity right now works with such profoundly held humanist assumptions and such passionate commitment to moral and ethical principles that it makes Che Guevara 's famous linkages of art , idealism and revolution seem modest . 
It is on behalf of these people , and out of my real respect for them , that I am responding to Mr. Asman 's opinions of their country . 
The Ochoa trial in July , with its revelations of deeply rooted and widespread corruption , and the summary trial and execution , was extremely disturbing to everyone who has ever considered himself a friend of Cuba . 
However , unacceptable though those occurrences may have been , they still provide no excuse for wholesale departures from truth . 
Mr. Asman should make distinctions among Fidel , the army and the Cuban people . 
They are not interchangeable , since they are motivated to act based on their own circumstances . 
It is naivete to equate a government 's policies with the will of the people ( as we well know ) , and it is even worse folly to merge the clearly divergent agendas of Fidel and the military and the state bureaucracy . 
Mr. Asman is also annoyed that Mr. Castro has resisted collaboration with U.S. officials , even though by his own account that collaboration has been devised essentially as a mechanism for acts directly hostile to the Cuban regime , such as facilitating defections . 
I think it 's a little disingenuous to be surprised that Fidel does n't invite the U.S. State Department to violate the jurisdiction of the Cuban government over its own territory . 
We badly need to follow fact rather than the rhetoric of conventional wisdom . 
Without this basic level of attention to reality , our policies on Cuba will continue to be as counterproductive as they have for 30 years . 
From my own point of view , given the qualities of humanity , creativity and warm spirit in which the Cuban people excel , we deny ourselves access to things we hold dear , and which seem to run in such short supply these days . 
There is no rational justification for such behavior . 
Rachel Weiss Brookline , Mass . 
ENGRAPH INC. recently reported third-quarter earnings , which were mistakenly shown in the Quarterly Earnings Surprises table in last Tuesday 's edition to be lower than the average of analysts ' estimates . 
Zacks Investment Research did n't adjust one analyst 's estimate for a stock split , which therefore was artificially high . 
Engraph 's third-quarter net income of 15 cents a share actually was 7 % higher than the adjusted average of estimates . 
Investors bailed out of New York City bonds in droves last week , driving prices lower and boosting yields . 
One bond trader estimated that more than $ 50 million of New York City general obligation bonds were put up for sale Friday alone . 
While that represents a small percentage of the city 's public debt outstanding , Friday 's selling followed a weeklong effort to unload the bonds by a broad spectrum of institutional and individual investors . 
`` I 've never seen so many { New York City } G.O. 's up for sale , '' said another trader . 
`` Every broker has blocks of every size and maturity . '' 
Municipal bond analysts said the sell-off was triggered by concerns about the city 's financial health , rumors of a $ 900 million bond offering coming soon , and political uncertainty . 
A spokesman for the city would n't confirm the size of the bond issue , but did say that a general obligation offering is in the works and should be priced sometime in the next two weeks , before the November mayoral election . 
( General obligation bonds are backed by the city 's overall revenues and credit . ) 
Although many investors were aware that a bond offering was being scheduled , many expected a much smaller amount of bonds to be sold . 
The fact that the city will issue such a large amount of debt was interpreted as a sign that New York 's budgetary problems are more serious than had been expected . 
New York , one of the nation 's largest issuers of tax-exempt bonds , sold $ 750 million of municipal bonds just a few weeks ago . 
There have been reports for months that the city 's economy is weakening , as the October 1987 stock market crash continues to make itself felt . 
The recent sharp stock market decline exacerbated those concerns . 
Meanwhile , tax revenues are falling while the city 's spending needs are expanding . 
Rumors persisted last week that New York 's credit ratings -- single-A from Moody 's Investors Service Inc. and single-A-minus from Standard & Poor 's Corp. -- are at risk . 
The weakness in New York City bonds follows a warning from New York state Comptroller Edward Regan that the 1987 crash seriously weakened the city 's economy . 
In a study , the comptroller said , `` The city 's glory days are over . '' 
Mr. Regan warned mayoral candidates `` to be prepared for limited options and constraints on service increases to address the city 's problems in the next few years , due to the now-evident weakening in the New York City economy . '' 
New York City 's revised financial plan , due out later this month , is expected to include measures to balance the city 's $ 27 billion budget . 
At present , analysts project a budget gap on the order of $ 500 million to $ 600 million for the fiscal year ending June 30 , 1990 , although the city 's own budget analysts project a narrower deficit . 
Mark Page , New York 's deputy director of finance , said that investors ' concerns about the city 's financial health are `` unwarranted given our proven ability to manage ourselves . '' 
He charges the city 's critics with spreading `` unfounded emotional rhetoric . '' 
There are also questions about whether a new and inexperienced mayor can manage the city through what could become a financial crisis . 
The leading contender for the mayoral office , Democrat David Dinkins , has been criticized recently for the way he handled his personal financial affairs . 
And the controversy has led to uncertainty about the outcome of the election . 
Until last week , Mr. Dinkins was considered a shoo-in . 
`` The market can adjust to good news or bad news , but uncertainty drives people wild , '' said Bernard B. Beal , chief executive of M.R. Beal & Co. , a securities firm that specializes in the municipal market . 
Until last week , `` Everyone felt certain they knew the outcome of the election . 
Now , there have been a number of questions raised . '' 
Last week , yields on long-term New York City general obligation bonds jumped half a percentage point . 
New York City 's 6 % bonds due 2018 , for example , were quoted late Friday at a price to yield 7.80 % , compared with 7.60 % Thursday . 
As the yield on New York general obligation bonds rose , the Bond Buyer 20-bond general obligation index , the mostly widely followed gauge of the tax-exempt market , held steady at 7.19 % in the week ended Oct. 19 . 
Qintex Australia Ltd. encountered another setback Friday when its Los Angeles-based affiliate , Qintex Entertainment Inc. , filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code . 
Qintex Entertainment also said David Evans , its president and chief executive , and Roger Kimmel , a director , both resigned . 
Neither could be reached for comment . 
Earlier this month , Qintex Australia 's $ 1.5 billion agreement to acquire MGM / UA Communications Co. collapsed because of a dispute over a $ 50 million letter of credit the Australian operator of television stations and resorts was to have supplied as security in the transaction . 
Mr. Evans had been the de facto head of MGM / UA for months . 
Qintex Entertainment , a producer and distributor of television programs most noted for its co-production of the hit miniseries `` Lonesome Dove , '' said it filed for Chapter 11 protection after Qintex Australia failed to provide it with $ 5.9 million owed to MCA Inc. in connection with the distribution of `` The New Leave It to Beaver Show . '' 
Qintex Entertainment is 43 % owned by Qintex Australia and said it relies on the Australian company for funding its working capital requirements . 
After the announcement of the bankruptcy filing , Qintex Entertainment stock sank $ 2.625 in over-the-counter trading to close at $ 1.50 on heavy volume of more than 1.4 million shares . 
The stock traded as high as $ 10 this past summer . 
Jonathan Lloyd , executive vice president and chief financial officer of Qintex Entertainment , said Qintex Entertainment was forced to file for protection to avoid going into default under its agreement with MCA . 
The $ 5.9 million payment was due Oct. 1 and the deadline for default was Oct. 19 . 
Mr. Lloyd said if Qintex had defaulted it could have been required to repay $ 92 million in debt under its loan agreements . 
MCA on Friday said that as a result of Qintex 's failure to make the required payment it was terminating the distribution agreement on `` The New Leave It to Beaver '' as well as other MCA properties . 
Qintex Australia was `` saying as recently as last weekend that they would take care of the situation . 
They continued to represent that to the board , '' said Mr. Lloyd . 
`` We were reassured they would stand behind the company . '' 
Mr. Lloyd said both Qintex Entertainment and Qintex Australia had attempted to secure a loan that would allow the company to make the $ 5.9 million payment but the request was turned down by an unidentified lender on Oct. 14 . 
At that point , he said , Qintex Australia stated it would `` endeavor to arrange '' the financing . 
However a Qintex Australia spokesman said his firm had never `` promised or guaranteed '' to make the payment . 
In a prepared statement from Australia , the company also said that , following the breakdown of the MGM talks , it `` had been re-evaluating its position as a significant shareholder and a substantial creditor of Qintex Entertainment '' and had `` resolved to minimize the degree of further loans to Qintex Entertainment in excess of that previously made . '' 
The Qintex Australia spokesman added that his company had opposed the Chapter 11 filing . 
He said the company believed Qintex Entertainment 's financial problems could have been resolved by other means . 
The report of the bankruptcy filing stunned Hollywood executives and investors . 
`` It 's a shocker , '' said Joseph Di Lillo , chairman of Drake Capital Securities , a brokerage firm that has an investment in Qintex Entertainment . 
Qintex Australia was `` going to pay more than $ 1 billion for MGM / UA and then they could n't come up with the far smaller sum of $ 5.9 million . '' 
Qintex said Mr. Evans , the former president , resigned for `` personal reasons '' and that Mr. Kimmel , an attorney , resigned because his participation in evaluating the company 's role in buying MGM / UA was no longer necessary . 
Mr. Kimmel was a director of the company and a predecessor firm since 1980 . 
The announcement seemed to further damp prospects that talks between Qintex Australia and MGM / UA might be revived . 
It 's understood that MGM / UA recently contacted Rupert Murdoch 's News Corp. , which made two failed bids for the movie studio , to see if the company was still interested . 
However , `` we are n't currently doing anything . 
It is n't a current topic of conversation at the company , '' said Barry Diller , chairman and chief executive officer of the Fox Inc. unit of News Corp . 
Financial printer Bowne & Co. said it formed a business translation service , which will provide legal , financial and other services in most major languages , including Japanese , Chinese and Russian . 
Japan 's Finance Ministry strongly denied playing any role in the New York stock-price free fall . 
Makoto Utsumi , vice minister for international affairs , said the ministry did n't in any way suggest to Japanese banks that they stay out of the UAL Corp. leveraged buy-out . 
The ministry has never even suggested that Japanese banks be cautious about leveraged buy-outs in general , Mr. Utsumi said . 
`` There are no facts { behind the assertions } that we sent any kind of signal , '' he declared in an interview . 
The comments were the ministry 's first detailed public statement on the subject , and reflect the ministry 's concern that foreigners will think Japan is using its tremendous financial power to control events in foreign markets . 
A number of accounts of the events leading to the 190 point drop in New York stock prices on Oct. 13 accused the ministry of pulling the plug on the UAL deal for one reason or another . 
Mr. Utsumi said the most the ministry had ever done was ask Japanese banks about `` the status of their participation '' in one previous U.S. leveraged buy-out . 
The ministry inquired about that deal -- which Mr. Utsumi declined to identify -- because the large presence of Japanese banks in the deal was `` being strongly criticized in the U.S. Congress '' and it was `` necessary for us to grasp the situation . '' 
He said the inquiry was n't made in a way that the banks could have interpreted as either encouraging or discouraging participation , and he added that none of the Japanese banks changed their posture on the deal as a result of the inquiry . 
Mr. Utsumi also said some Japanese banks were willing to participate in the UAL financing up to the very end , which would suggest at the very least that they were n't under orders to back out . 
In general , Mr. Utsumi said , Japanese banks are becoming more `` independent '' in their approach to overseas deals . 
`` Each Japanese bank has its own judgment on the profits and risks in that { UAL } deal , '' he said . 
`` They are becoming more independent . 
It 's a sound phenomenon . '' 
Sanwa Bank Ltd. is one Japanese bank that decided not to participate in the first UAL proposal . 
A Sanwa Bank spokesman denied that the finance ministry played any part in the bank 's decision . 
`` We made our own decision , '' he said . 
Still , Mr. Utsumi may have a hard time convincing market analysts who have rightly or wrongly believed that the ministry played a role in orchestrating recent moves by Japanese banks . 
All week there has been much speculation in financial circles in Tokyo and abroad about the ministry 's real position . 
Bank analysts say ministry officials have been growing increasingly concerned during the past few months about Japanese banks getting in over their heads . 
`` The { ministry } thinks the banks do n't know what they are doing , that they have very little idea how to cope with risk , '' said one foreign bank analyst who asked not to be identified . 
`` The { ministry } wants to see the Japanese banks pull in their horns '' on leveraged buy-outs , he added . 
Although some of the Japanese banks involved in the first proposed bid for UAL bowed out because they found the terms unattractive , observers here say they have a hard time believing that commercial considerations were the only reason . 
Japanese banks are under `` political pressure '' as well , the analyst said . 
Moreover , analysts point out that Japanese banks have a reputation for doing deals that are n't extremely profitable if they offer the chance to build market share , cement an important business relationship or curry favor with powerful bureaucrats . 
Clearly , some financial authorities are concerned about the Japanese banks role in leveraged buy-outs . 
At a news conference this week , Bank of Japan Gov. Satoshi Sumita cautioned banks to take a `` prudent '' stance regarding highly leveraged deals . 
Despite Mr. Sumita 's statements , it is the Finance Ministry , not the central bank , that makes policy decisions . 
While recent events may cool some of the leveraged buy-out fever , Japanese banks are n't likely to walk away from the game . 
Despite the risks , the deals can be an attractive way for Japanese banks to increase their presence in the U.S. market , bank analysts say . 
Flush with cash at home , but with fewer customers to lend to , leading banks are eager to expand overseas . 
Jumping in on big deals is a high profile way to leapfrog the problem of not having a strong retail-banking network . 
France 's national tobacco company , known for making brown-tobacco cigarettes such as Gauloises and Gitanes , is branching out . 
Concerned by dipping demand for its traditional products , it is moving not only into blonde cigarettes , but also into electronic car-parking payment cards to be sold in neighborhood tobacco stores . 
Brown tobacco in France is a more pungent , stronger grade than the lighter grade , or blonde tobacco , used in so-called American-style cigarettes . 
`` We are n't Philip Morris Cos. , '' says Bertrand de Galle , chairman of government-owned Societe Nationale d'Exploitation Industrielle des Tabacs & Allumettes S.A. , known as Seita . 
He says that because Seita 's profits are limited by government-controlled cigarette prices , he does n't have the cash to diversify as heavily into food and drink as the U.S. concern has done . 
( Last year , for example , Seita 's net profit soared 150 % to 461.6 million French francs ( $ 73.5 million ) on sales of FFr 27.68 billion - a 1.7 % profit margin . ) 
Instead , he said in an interview , he is looking for ways to exploit France 's network of 39,000 tobacco agents , most of them cafes . 
While Seita does n't own the French tabacs , its close alliance with them offers distribution possibilities . 
One proposal is to introduce a new payment system for parking in Paris . 
Instead of paying for parking by putting money in the existing machines , which deliver little paper receipts , drivers would be able to buy electronic cards in local tobacco shops . 
Once activated , the card would sit in the car 's window , showing traffic wardens how much time the motorist could remain . 
When the motorist returned to his car he could turn the card off and , if it showed time remaining , save it for later . 
Seita is a partner in the project , which was developed by Matra SA using Japanese technology . 
Seita and Matra currently are negotiating with city officials for the right to begin service . 
And Seita is considering further diversification . 
It wanted to buy RJR Nabisco Inc. 's French cracker subsidiary , Belin , in hopes of selling its products in tobacco stores , but lost the bidding to food group BSN SA . 
It currently is considering bidding for Swedish Match Co . 
And it retains an interest in acquiring candies and other articles that might be sold in tobacco shops . 
It also is trying to shore up its tobacco business . 
Brown-tobacco cigarettes such as Gauloises now make up just 40 % of the French tobacco market , half the level of about two decades ago . 
While Seita retains a manufacturing monopoly in France , it is being hurt by rising imports and from waning cigarette demand . 
So Seita has introduced blonde cigarettes under the Gauloises label , and intends to relaunch the unsuccessful Gitanes Blondes in new packaging , similar to the slide-packs used by brown-tobacco Gitanes . 
The aim , says Mr. de Galle , is to win market share from imported cigarettes , and to persuade smokers who are switching to blonde cigarettes to keep buying French . 
When the Supreme Court upheld Missouri 's abortion restrictions last July , the justices almost certainly did n't have drunk driving , trespassing and false imprisonment on their minds . 
But the 5-4 ruling may have had as much immediate impact on those activities -- especially trespassing -- as on abortion rights . 
The decision , Webster vs. Reproductive Health Services , illustrates how Supreme Court rulings often have a ripple effect , spreading into areas of law and policy that were n't part of the actual cases decided and that never were contemplated by the justices . 
In the Missouri case , unforeseen consequences may have arisen because the high court reinstated the preamble of the state 's 1986 abortion law . 
The preamble says that human life begins at conception and that unborn children have rights protected by the Constitution . 
Last year , a federal appeals court in St. Louis said the preamble was unconstitutional , citing an earlier Supreme Court ruling that states ca n't justify stricter abortion curbs by changing the definition of when life begins . 
But the Supreme Court concluded that it was premature to rule on the constitutionality of the preamble because the definition of human life had n't yet been used to restrict abortion services . 
The high court majority said it was up to the state courts for now to decide whether the definition has any bearing on other state laws . 
Already , local Missouri judges have relied on the restored preamble in two separate cases to throw out criminal trespass charges against anti-abortion demonstrators who blocked access to Reproductive Health Services , an abortion clinic in St. Louis . 
The protesters said their actions were justified by the desire to save the lives of unborn children . 
Under a 1981 Missouri law , persons accused of some crimes , including trespassing , may offer a defense that their actions were justified `` as an emergency measure to avoid an imminent public or private injury . '' 
Relying on the preamble 's statement that a fetus is an unborn child , the two St. Louis County Circuit Court judges in August accepted the justification that the abortion clinic protesters were trying to save lives . 
In another case , a protester , Ann O'Brien , was convicted of trespass before the Supreme Court 's Webster ruling . 
Last week , when her appeal was argued before the Missouri Court of Appeals , her lawyer also relied on the preamble . 
`` The effect of the Supreme Court Webster opinion is that it left room for grass to grow in the cracks of Roe vs. Wade , and I think this is one of the cracks , '' said Mark Belz , a St. Louis lawyer who represented Ms. O'Brien and the other St. Louis protesters . 
Roe vs. Wade was the Supreme Court 's 1973 decision that recognized a woman 's right to abortion . 
Mario Mandina , president of Kansas City Lawyers for Life , says that if abortion foes succeed in using the preamble to escape prosecution for trespass , `` This will shut down abortion in Missouri . 
There 's no risk to the protesters , and you ca n't keep an abortion clinic open if there are 3,000 people standing outside every day . '' 
That would be an ironic result of a case in which the Supreme Court expressly stopped short of overruling Roe vs. Wade . 
In two other cases , the possible consequences of the Supreme Court ruling appear even more unintended . 
In one , the lawyer for a 20-year-old resident of Columbia , Mo. , who was charged with drunk driving , argued that his client should be treated as a 21-year-old adult because his actual age should be calculated from conception , not from birth . 
In Missouri , those caught drinking and driving between the ages of 16 and 21 may have their licenses revoked for one year , while those 21 or older suffer only a 30-day suspension . 
A Boone County judge rejected the motion , but Daniel Dodson , a Jefferson City lawyer , says he has appealed . 
And in a case filed in federal court in August , a lawyer is arguing that Missouri authorities are wrongfully imprisoning the fetus of a pregnant woman who is in jail for theft and forgery . 
In terms of sheer brutality , the Somali regime of Siad Barre may rank as No. 1 in the world . 
The only reason that Somalia remains in obscurity is numbers : a sparsely populated wasteland of 8.5 million people spread out over an expanse nearly the size of Texas . 
The Barre dictatorship simply is limited in the amount of people it can torture and kill . 
Beheading small children , stabbing elderly people to death , raping and shooting women , and burying people alive are just a few of the grisly activities that the Somali armed forces have been engaged in over the past two years . 
Up to 500,000 Somalis have escaped to the relative safety of Marxist Ethiopia because of the behavior of President Barre 's troops . 
In the port of Berbera , for example , hundreds of men of the rival Issak clan were rounded up in May 1988 , imprisoned , and then taken out at night in groups of five to 50 men to be executed without any judicial process whatsoever . 
Guns were never used : Each man was stabbed to death with a large knife . 
The horrific details are only now emerging from a painstakingly documented report , based on hundreds of interviews with randomly selected refugees . 
The study was done by Robert Gersony , a consultant to the U.S. State Department who has years of experience in investigating human-rights abuses on both sides of the left-right ideological divide . 
What gives these events particular significance , however , is the fact that they are part of a wider drama affecting the strategic positions of both the U.S. and the Soviet Union on the horn of Africa . 
Not since the late 1970s has the horn been so up for grabs as it has suddenly become in just the past few weeks . 
Mr. Barre 's rule is crumbling fast . 
Mutinies wrack his armed forces ( really just an armed gang ) , which control less than half the country . 
Inflation is at record levels . 
Desperate , he has called in the Libyans to help fight the rebels of the Somali National Movement in the north , which is only one of several groups picking away at the regime in the capital of Mogadishu . 
Seventy years old and a self-declared `` scientific socialist , '' President Barre has a power base , composed only of his minority Mareham clan , that according to observers is `` narrowing . '' 
The U.S. 's interest in Somalia consists of a single runway at the port of Berbera , which U.S. military aircraft have the right to use for surveillance of the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean . 
That strip of concrete is backed up by a few one-story , air-conditioned shacks where a handful of American nationals -- buttressed by imported food , cold soft drinks and back issues of Sports Illustrated -- maintain radio contact with the outside world . 
In the past two years , the desert behind them has become a land of mass executions and utter anarchy , where , due to Mr. Barre 's brutality and ineptitude , nobody is any longer in control . 
As long as the rival Soviet-backed regime of Mengistu Haile Mariam held a total gridlock over neighboring Ethiopia , the U.S. was forced to accept that lonely Berbera runway as a distant No. 2 to the Soviets ' array of airfields next door . 
But due to dramatic events on the battlefield over the past few days and weeks , those Soviet bases may soon be as endangered and as lonely as the American runway . 
On Sept. 7 , I wrote on these pages about the killing and capturing of 10,000 Ethiopian soldiers by Eritrean and Tigrean guerrillas . 
Recently , in Wollo province in the center of Ethiopia , Tigrean forces have killed , wounded and captured an additional 20,000 government troops . 
( Think what these numbers mean -- considering the headline space devoted to hundreds of deaths in Lebanon , a small country of little strategic importance ! ) 
Tigrean armies are now 200 miles north of Addis Ababa , threatening the town of Dese , which would cut off Mr. Mengistu 's capital from the port of Assab , through which all fuel and other supplies reach Addis Ababa . 
As a result , Mr. Mengistu has been forced to transfer thousands of troops from Eritrea just to hold the town , thereby risking the loss of even more territory in Eritrea only to keep the Tigreans at bay . 
Mr. Mengistu is in an increasingly weak position : Half his army is tied down defending the northern city of Asmara from the Eritreans . 
The weaker he gets , the more he turns toward the U.S. for help . 
While the Tigreans are communists , like the Eritreans they are among the most anti-Soviet guerrillas in the world , having suffered more than a decade of aerial bombardment by the Soviet-supplied Mengistu air force . 
What this all means in shorthand is that Soviet dominance in Ethiopia is collapsing as fast as President Barre 's regime in Somalia is . 
The U.S. , therefore , has a historic opportunity both to strike a blow for human rights in Somalia and to undo the superpower flip-flop of the late 1970s on the Horn of Africa . 
Back to Somalia : 
The State Department , to its credit , has already begun distancing itself from Mr. Barre , evinced by its decision to publish the Gersony report ( which the press has ignored ) . 
What 's more , the U.S. has suspended $ 2.5 million in military aid and $ 1 million in economic aid . 
But this is not enough . 
Because the U.S. is still perceived to be tied to Mr. Barre , when he goes the runway could go too . 
Considering how tenuous the security of that runway is anyway , the better option -- both morally and strategically -- would be for the Bush administration to blast the regime publicly , in terms clear enough for all influential Somalis to understand . 
It is a certainty that Mr. Barre 's days are numbered . 
The U.S. should take care , however , that its own position in the country does not go down with him . 
Nobody is sure what will come next in Somalia or whom the successor might be . 
But as one expert tells me : `` Whoever it is will have to work pretty damn hard to be worse than Barre . '' 
While the State Department positions itself for the post-Barre period in Somalia , it should continue to back former President Carter 's well-intentioned role as a mediator between Mr. Mengistu and the Eritrean guerrillas in Ethiopia , while concomitantly opening up channels of communications with the Tigrean rebels through neighboring Sudan . 
Ethiopian politics are the most sophisticated , secretive and Byzantine in all of black Africa . 
Remember that it took Mr. Mengistu many months , in what became known as the `` creeping coup , '' to topple Emperor Haile Selassie in 1974 and 1975 . 
There is simply no way to engineer a succession covertly , as is sometimes possible elsewhere on the continent . 
But the U.S. has one great advantage : The Soviets are universally loathed throughout Ethiopia for what they did to the country this past decade -- famine and all . 
It 's not just in Eastern Europe where the march of events is finally on the U.S. side , but on the horn of Africa as well . 
The only U.S. liability in the region is what remains of the link to Mr. Barre , and that should be cut fast . 
Mr. Kaplan , author of `` Surrender or Starve : The Wars Behind the Famine '' ( Westview Press , 1988 ) , lives in Lisbon . 
Translant Inc. , Rancho Cucamonga , Calif. , got an $ 86 million Navy contract for missile-launch systems . 
General Electric Co. received a $ 30.6 million Air Force contract for MX-missile nose cones . 
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. was awarded a $ 19.1 million Army contract for armored-vehicle parts . 
Analytic Sciences Corp. was awarded a $ 10.1 million Air Force contract for technical support . 
McCormick Capital Inc. said the final proration factor was 0.628394 on its oversubscribed , $ 3-a-share tender offer to buy back as many as 1.1 million of its common shares . 
Payment will begin `` as soon as Oct. 25 , '' the company said . 
McCormick is a developer and manager of futures-investment limited partnerships . 
Through a separate agreement between Peter Dauchy , president , and a group of selling shareholders , the company said , Mr. Dauchy will on Oct. 30 buy 231,405 shares from the group , boosting his stake to about 717,000 shares , or 50.7 % of the total after the buy-back . 
Canada 's consumer price index rose a seasonally adjusted 0.2 % in September from August , Statistics Canada , a federal agency , said . 
The rise followed boosts of 0.1 % in August , 0.7 % in July and 0.6 % in June . 
OPEC 's ability to produce more petroleum than it can sell is beginning to cast a shadow over world oil markets . 
Output from the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is already at a high for the year and most member nations are running flat out . 
But industry and OPEC officials agree that a handful of members still have enough unused capacity to glut the market and cause an oil-price collapse a few months from now if OPEC does n't soon adopt a new quota system to corral its chronic cheaters . 
As a result , the effort by some oil ministers to get OPEC to approve a new permanent production-sharing agreement next month is taking on increasing urgency . 
The organization is scheduled to meet in Vienna beginning Nov. 25 . 
So far this year , rising demand for OPEC oil and production restraint by some members have kept prices firm despite rampant cheating by others . 
But that could change if demand for OPEC 's oil softens seasonally early next year as some think may happen . 
OPEC is currently producing more than 22 million barrels a day , sharply above its nominal , self-imposed fourth-quarter ceiling of 20.5 million , according to OPEC and industry officials at an oil conference here sponsored by the Oil Daily and the International Herald Tribune . 
At that rate , a majority of OPEC 's 13 members have reached their output limits , they said . 
But it is estimated that at least three million barrels a day -- and possibly as much as seven million barrels a day -- of spare capacity still exists within OPEC . 
Most is concentrated in five Persian Gulf countries , including his own , Issam Al-Chalabi , Iraq 's oil minister , told the conference Friday . 
He puts OPEC 's current capacity at 28 million to 29 million barrels a day . 
That 's higher than some other estimates . 
Ali Khalifa Al-Sabah , Kuwait 's oil minister , recently estimated OPEC capacity at 25 million barrels a day . 
Either way , the overhang is big enough to keep delicately balanced oil markets on edge . 
Even modest amounts of additional output by those with the huge extra capacity and reserves , such as Saudi Arabia and Iraq , could upset the market . 
The Iraqi oil minister and Saudi oil minister Hisham Nazer insisted in their comments to the conference that their countries would act responsibly to maintain a stable market . 
However , in interviews later , both ministers stressed that they expect future OPEC quotas to be based mainly on the production capacity and reserves of each member . 
Under that approach , countries with the most unused oil capacity would get bigger shares of any future increases in OPEC 's production ceiling than they would under the current system . 
`` If you are already producing at 95 % or 100 % of your capacity , what 's the good to be told you can produce at 105 % of capacity ? '' asked Mr. Al-Chalabi . 
At an inconclusive Geneva meeting late last month , OPEC 's oil ministers halfheartedly approved another increase of one million barrels a day in their production ceiling . 
They doled it out using the existing formula , however , which meant that even those countries that could n't produce more received higher official allotments . 
The main effect of the ceiling boost was to `` legitimize '' some of the overproduction already coming from the quota cheaters . 
Still , there was a breakthrough at Geneva . 
Previously , no OPEC member had been willing to accept a reduction in its percentage share of the group 's total output target , or ceiling . 
But the concept of disproportionate quotas for those with unused capacity , advanced there in an Iranian proposal , was generally endorsed by the ministers . 
In the end politics got in the way . 
Libya accepted Iran 's proposal only so long as it was promised production parity with Kuwait . 
And the United Arab Emirates , a chronic quota cheater , refused to give any guarantee it would change its ways . 
But the oil ministers continue to study the plan , and it will probably be the basis for discussion at next month 's meeting . 
It 's understood several compromises already have been worked into the plan . 
The ceiling would be lifted to 21.5 million barrels to provide Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates much higher official quotas while reducing percentage shares of some others . 
Libya 's previous conditions are no longer considered a problem , although the United Arab Emirates is still an issue . 
Saudi Arabia , OPEC 's kingpin , also has surfaced as a possible obstacle , some OPEC sources said . 
Insisting on a 24.5 % share of any ceiling , Saudi officials have long pressed for the pro rata distribution of increases to all members . 
In Geneva , however , they supported Iran 's proposal because it would have left the Saudi percentage of the OPEC total intact , and increased actual Saudi volume to nearly 5.3 million barrels daily from five million . 
Some of the proposed modifications since , however , call on Saudi Arabia to `` give back '' to the production-sharing pool a token 23,000 barrels . 
Though tiny , that 's a reduction in its share . 
Mr. Nazer , the Saudi oil minister , reiterated here that the kingdom would insist on maintaining its percentage share of OPEC production under any quota revisions . 
`` Under any circumstances , Saudi Arabia should get more '' rather than less , Mr. Nazer said . 
In a blow to France 's Rafale jet fighter , the French navy for the first time publicly stated its desire to buy 15 McDonnell Douglas Corp. F-18 Hornets to defend its aircraft carriers . 
The statement is likely to sharpen the debate within France 's military establishment over the Rafale , which is made by Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet Aviation SA . 
In an interview in the navy 's official weekly magazine Cols Bleus , the navy 's second-in-command , Adm. Yves Goupil , said the navy still intends to buy 86 Rafales as scheduled in the late 1990s and early 21st century . 
The air force is to take at least 250 more . 
Adm. Goupil said the navy ca n't wait until 1998 , when the naval Rafale becomes available , to replace its obsolete fleet of American-made Crusaders , used since the 1950s to protect carriers from attack . 
Rather than renovate the Crusaders , which Dassault is proposing to do for around 1.8 billion French francs ( $ 286.6 million ) , Adm. Goupil said the navy wants to buy used F-18s from the U.S. Navy . 
Officially , the statement is n't an attack on the Rafale . 
Adm. Goupil said that when the F-18s wear out , the navy is prepared to take Rafales to replace them . 
But unofficially , senior navy officials sharply criticize the Rafale as an air force plane ill-suited to carrier use . 
Although they never said so publicly , they have made no secret of their preference for the F-18 on operational grounds . 
Adm. Goupil 's comments are likely to inflame the broader dispute within the military establishment here over the role of Dassault . 
Although government-controlled , Dassault still is run by the founder 's son , Chairman Serge Dassault , who has fiercely protected his company 's independence . 
The Rafale project is the result of France 's inability jointly to develop a plane with other countries , and French officials question whether the state can continue paying for expensive independent programs . 
So far , Mr. Dassault has resisted pressure to change . 
What brought the naval issue to a head is that the Crusaders are literally falling apart , without any immediate plan to replace them . 
Adm. Goupil , a former Crusader squadron leader , said that the last other country to use Crusaders , the Philippines , retired its last ones two years ago . 
A French Crusader crash a few months ago heightened pressure for new planes here . 
Adm. Goupil rejected Dassault 's proposal to renovate the Crusaders , saying the cost was impossible to estimate . 
Even modernized , he said , the Crusaders represent an obsolete and dangerous protection for the aircraft carriers France has sent to meet such crises as the wars in Lebanon and the Persian Gulf . 
Defense Minister Jean-Pierre Chevenement told a meeting of the Anglo-American Press Association that the question of modernizing the Crusaders or buying used F18s is a `` political '' decision that he will make in due time . 
THE SUPREME COURT ruling upholding Missouri 's restrictive abortion law was Webster vs. Reproductive Health Services . 
The citation was misstated in Friday 's edition . 
Spending by average Japanese households in August fell an adjusted 1.9 % from a year earlier , the Statistics Bureau of the Prime Minister 's Office said . 
The bureau cited typhoons in the month that discouraged shopping and leisure opportunities . 
Spending by Japanese households averaged 290,782 yen ( $ 2,052.10 ) in August . 
In nominal terms it rose 0.6 % from a year earlier before adjustment . 
August adjusted spending by wage-earning families was down 0.6 % to 309,381 yen from a year earlier . 
The real income of wage-earning families in the month eased 1.2 % to 438,845 yen from the previous year . 
For Cathay Pacific Airways , the smooth ride may be ending . 
The first signs of trouble came last month when the Hong Kong carrier , a subsidiary of Swire Pacific Ltd. , posted a 5 % drop in operating profit for the first six months and warned that margins will remain under pressure for the rest of the year . 
Securities analysts , many of whom scrapped their buy recommendations after seeing Cathay 's interim figures , believe more jolts lie ahead . 
Fuel and personnel costs are rising , and tourism in and through Hong Kong remains clouded by China 's turmoil since the June 4 killings in Beijing . 
In addition , delivery delays for the first two of as many as 28 Boeing 747-400s that the carrier has ordered have raised costs because personnel had been hired to man the planes . 
And tough competition in the air-freight market is cutting into an important sideline . 
There also is concern that once Hong Kong reverts to China 's sovereignty in 1997 , Cathay will be forced to play second fiddle to China 's often-disparaged flag carrier , Civil Aviation Administration of China , or CAAC . 
`` The sense is we would never be in a position again where everything works for us the way it did before , '' says Rod Eddington , Cathay 's commercial director . 
Sarah Hall , an analyst at James Capel ( Far East ) Ltd. , says there is n't much Cathay can do about rising costs for jet fuel , Hong Kong 's tight labor market , or the strengthening of the local currency , which is pegged to the U.S. dollar . 
These factors are further complicated by the airline 's push to transform itself from a regional carrier to an international one , Ms. Hall says . 
Ms. Hall expects Cathay 's profit to grow around 13 % annually this year and next . 
In 1988 , it earned $ 2.82 billion Hong Kong ( US$ 361.5 million ) on revenue of HK$ 11.79 billion . 
Cathay is taking several steps to bolster business . 
One step is to beef up its fleet . 
In addition to aircraft from Boeing Co. , Cathay announced earlier this year an order for as many as 20 Airbus A330-300s . 
The expansion , which could cost as much as US$ 5.7 billion over the next eight years , will expand the fleet to about 43 planes by 1991 , up from 30 at the end of last year , according to Sun Hung Kai Securities Ltd . 
The fuel-efficient Airbus planes will be used largely to replace Cathay 's aging fleet of Lockheed Tristars for regional flights , while the Boeing aircraft will be used on long-haul routes to Europe and North America . 
Cathay also is moving some of its labor-intensive data-processing operations outside Hong Kong . 
Fierce bidding for young employees in Hong Kong is pushing up Cathay 's labor costs by 20 % a year for low-level staff , while experienced , skilled employees are leaving the colony as part of the brain drain . 
Some jobs already have been moved to Australia , and there are plans to place others in Canada . 
David Bell , a spokesman for the airline , says the move is partly aimed at retaining existing staff who are leaving to secure foreign passports ahead of 1997 . 
Cathay is working to promote Hong Kong as a destination worth visiting on its own merits , rather than just a stopover . 
Although the June 4 killings in Beijing have hurt its China flights , Cathay 's other routes have retained high load factors . 
Mr. Eddington regards promoting Hong Kong as an important part of attracting visitors from Japan , South Korea and Taiwan , where the number of people looking to travel abroad has surged . 
There also has been speculation that Cathay will be among the major private-sector participants in the Hong Kong government 's plans to build a new airport , with the carrier possibly investing in its own terminal . 
Cathay officials decline to comment on the speculation . 
Mr. Eddington sees alliances with other carriers -- particularly Cathay 's recent link with AMR Corp. 's American Airlines -- as an important part of Cathay 's strategy . 
But he emphasizes that Cathay has n't any interest in swapping equity stakes with the U.S. carrier or with Lufthansa , the West German airline with which it has cooperated for about a decade . 
Analysts believe Cathay is approached for such swaps by other carriers on a regular basis , particularly as the popularity of share exchanges has grown among European carriers . 
`` We think alliances are very important , '' Mr. Eddington says . 
`` But we 'd rather put funds into our own business rather than someone else 's . 
I 'm not sure cross-ownership would necessarily make things smoother . '' 
In a pattern it aims to copy in several key U.S. destinations , Cathay recently announced plans to serve San Francisco by flying into American Airlines ' Los Angeles hub and routing continuing passengers onto a flight on the U.S. carrier . 
`` We 'll never have a big operation in the U.S. , and they 'll never have one as big as us in the Pacific , '' Mr. Eddington says . 
`` But this way , American will coordinate good extensions to Boston , New York , Chicago and Dallas . 
We 'll coordinate on this end to places like Bangkok , Singapore and Manila . '' 
Asian traffic , which currently accounts for 65 % of Cathay 's business , is expected to continue as the carrier 's mainstay . 
Cathay has long stated its desire to double its weekly flights into China to 14 , and it is applying to restart long-canceled flights into Vietnam . 
Further expansion into southern Europe is also possible , says Mr. Bell , the spokesman . 
While a large number of Hong Kong companies have reincorporated offshore ahead of 1997 , such a move is n't an option for Cathay because it would jeopardize its landing rights in Hong Kong . 
And Mr. Eddington emphatically rules out a move to London : `` Our lifeblood is Hong Kong traffic rights . '' 
He says the airline is putting its faith in the Sino-British agreement on Hong Kong 's return to China . 
A special section dealing with aviation rights states that landing rights for Hong Kong 's airlines , which include the smaller Hong Kong Dragon Airlines , will continue to be negotiated by Hong Kong 's government . 
But critics fret that post-1997 officials ultimately will be responsible to Beijing . 
`` My feeling is { Cathay does n't } have a hope in the long run , '' says an analyst , who declines to be identified . 
`` Cathay would love to keep going , but the general sense is they 're going to have to do something . '' 
Mr. Eddington acknowledges that the carrier will have to evolve and adapt to local changes , but he feels that the Sino-British agreement is firm ground to build on for the foreseeable future . 
`` We 're confident that it protects our route structure , '' he says , `` and our ability to grow and prosper . 
Falcon Cable Systems Co. said it proposed an amendment that would allow it to increase its debt cap to 65 % of the company 's fair market value from the 40 % currently allowed . 
Falcon , a limited partnership , said it wanted the increase in order to continue its $ 2.15-per-unit annual payment , and for expansion and acquisitions . 
A spokesman for the company said a meeting would be held for shareholders to vote on the amendment before year 's end . 
Friday , October 20 , 1989 
The key U.S. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but do n't always represent actual transactions . 
PRIME RATE : 10 1\/2 % . 
The base rate on corporate loans at large U.S. money center commercial banks . 
FEDERAL FUNDS : 8 3\/4 % high , 8 5\/8 % low , 8 11\/16 % near closing bid , 8 3\/4 % offered . 
Reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $ 1 million or more . 
Source : Fulton Prebon ( U.S.A . ) Inc . 
DISCOUNT RATE : 7 % . 
The charge on loans to depository institutions by the New York Federal Reserve Bank . 
CALL MONEY : 9 3\/4 % to 10 % . 
The charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER placed directly by General Motors Acceptance Corp. : 8.50 % 15 to 44 days ; 8.25 % 45 to 72 days ; 8.375 % 73 to 96 days ; 8.125 % 97 to 119 days ; 8 % 120 to 149 days ; 7.875 % 150 to 179 days ; 7.50 % 180 to 270 days . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER : High-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $ 1,000 : 8.55 % 30 days ; 8.45 % 60 days ; 8.40 % 90 days . 
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT : 8.05 % one month ; 8.02 % two months ; 8 % three months ; 7.98 % six months ; 7.95 % one year . 
Average of top rates paid by major New York banks on primary new issues of negotiable C.D.s , usually on amounts of $ 1 million and more . 
The minimum unit is $ 100,000 . 
Typical rates in the secondary market : 8.55 % one month ; 8.50 % three months ; 8.40 % six months . 
BANKERS ACCEPTANCES : 8.45 % 30 days ; 8.33 % 60 days ; 8.32 % 90 days ; 8.15 % 120 days ; 8.06 % 150 days ; 7.96 % 180 days . 
Negotiable , bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order . 
LONDON LATE EURODOLLARS : 8 11\/16 % to 8 9\/16 % one month ; 8 11\/16 % to 8 9\/16 % two months ; 8 11\/16 % to 8 9\/16 % three months ; 8 5\/8 % to 8 1\/2 % four months ; 8 9\/16 % to 8 7\/16 % five months ; 8 1\/2 % to 8 3\/8 % six months . 
LONDON INTERBANK OFFERED RATES ( LIBOR ) : 8 3\/4 % one month ; 8 11\/16 % three months ; 8 9\/16 % six months ; 8 1\/2 % one year . 
The average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the London market based on quotations at five major banks . 
FOREIGN PRIME RATES : Canada 13.50 % ; Germany 8.50 % ; Japan 4.875 % ; Switzerland 8.50 % ; Britain 15 % . 
These rate indications are n't directly comparable ; lending practices vary widely by location . 
TREASURY BILLS : Results of the Monday , October 16 , 1989 , auction of short-term U.S. government bills , sold at a discount from face value in units of $ 10,000 to $ 1 million : 7.37 % 13 weeks ; 7.42 % 26 weeks . 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP . ( Freddie Mac ) : Posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days. 9.84 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 7.875 % , 2 % rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION ( Fannie Mae ) : Posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days ( priced at par ) 9.78 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 8.75 % , 6\/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
MERRILL LYNCH READY ASSETS TRUST : 8.52 % . 
Annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days ; not a forecast of future returns . 
In the hard-hit Marina neighborhood , life after the earthquake is often all too real , but sometimes surreal . 
Some scenes : -- Saturday morning , a resident was given 15 minutes to scurry into a sagging building and reclaim what she could of her life 's possessions . 
Saturday night she dined in an emergency shelter on salmon steaks prepared by chefs from one of the city 's four-star restaurants . 
-- Mayor Art Agnos stands in the glare of television lights trying to explain for the 20th time why the city is severely restricting access to badly damaged structures . 
A couple in fashionable spandex warm-up suits jogs by , headphones jauntily in place , weaving their way along a street of fractured and fallen houses . 
At a nearby corner , they swerve perilously close to a listing apartment house , oblivious to any danger . 
A policeman shakes his head in amazement as he steers them away . 
-- A young woman who has been out of town shows up at the Marina Middle School to learn that her apartment is on the condemned list . 
She is told she ca n't enter unless she is accompanied by an inspector . 
She bursts into tears and walks away . 
Nearby , five temporary residents of the school shelter sit on stools , having their necks and backs kneaded by volunteer masseuses . 
The Marina rescue center offered a very San Franciscan response to the disaster . 
In addition to free massages , there was free counseling , phone calls and a free shuttle bus to a health club , which offered up its showers , saunas and hot tubs . 
The cafeteria offered donated croissants and brie for breakfast , and for dinner , pasta salad and chocolate mousse torts along with the salmon . 
`` This has been a 15-pound earthquake for me , '' said resident Joan O'Shea , who works in an acupuncturist 's office . 
She and some friends are considering offering earthquake victims free yoga classes and `` aroma therapy '' -- massages with scented oils . 
She finds the response of Marina residents -- primarily yuppies and elderly people -- to the devastation of their homes `` incredible . 
People have been very respectful of each other . 
I do n't know if this would have happened somewhere else . '' 
Out on the streets , some residents of badly damaged buildings were allowed a 15-minute scavenger hunt through their possessions . 
`` It 's so weird to have to decide what 's really important to you , '' said Barbara May . 
She went first for personal mementos . 
In post-earthquake parlance , her building is a `` red . '' 
After being inspected , buildings with substantial damage were color-coded . 
Green allowed residents to re-enter ; yellow allowed limited access ; red allowed residents one last entry to gather everything they could within 15 minutes . 
Reds and yellows went about their business with a kind of measured grimness . 
Some frantically dumped belongings into pillowcases , others threw goods out windows . 
It did n't help that on Saturday , after three days of sunshine , it rained . 
`` The guys are going for their skis , their stereos , their personal computers , '' said Frank Fitzgerald , who helped others empty their apartments . 
`` The women wanted photo albums , a certain brooch , kind of sentimental things . '' 
He showed an unbroken , still-ticking pocket watch that he retrieved for one woman . 
It belonged to her grandfather . 
Some residents defied orders and returned to `` red '' buildings to retrieve goods . 
One building was upgraded to red status while people were taking things out , and a resident who was n't allowed to go back inside called up the stairs to his girlfriend , telling her to keep sending things down to the lobby . 
A policewoman had to be called in to make her leave ; the policewoman helped carry out one last load . 
Enforcement of restricted-entry rules was sporadic , residents said . 
One man trying to remove his car was told by officials to get out of his garage . 
When he sneaked back later to try again , a different policeman offered to help him get the car out . 
The Marina also has become the focal point of city efforts to reunite residents with any pets that may have fled or become lost during the earthquake . 
On lampposts along Fillmore Street , a major Marina artery , posters were offering a $ 100 reward for a cat lost during the quake . 
The San Francisco Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals also has been providing medical care , food , water and foster homes for quake-displaced animals . 
The SPCA says it has received more than 100 requests for foster homes on behalf of dogs and cats , though some people have sought temporary homes for birds and fish . 
For example , one parakeet owner returning home found that her apartment , like many others in the Marina , did n't have heat . 
`` She can stay there with no heat , but for a parakeet , that can be deadly , '' says Daralee Konowitch , animalcare services manager for the SPCA . 
A warm foster home has been found . 
The neighborhood around Alexander Haagen Co. 's Vermont-Slauson Shopping Center in the Watts section of Los Angeles resembles the crime-ridden , deteriorating sections of many inner cities and certainly is n't the sort of area one would choose to visit . 
But turn into the shopping center 's parking lot , and one could be in the safe , busy mall of a prosperous suburb . 
Only it is safer , and busier . 
Over the past year there have been only one burglary , three thefts of or from autos , no purse-snatchings , and one attempted robbery in the mall , which opened in late 1981 . 
A shopping center of similar size in an affluent Los Angeles suburb would , per year , be expected to have eight burglaries , 70 thefts of or from autos , and four robberies . 
The Watts mall has annual sales of more than $ 350 per leasable square foot ; the figure for a comparable suburban shopping center would be $ 200 . 
Three other Haagen shopping centers in the Watts area are doing almost as well . 
A successful low-crime mall in a high-crime area violates the more typical inner-city pattern , in which commercial areas are taken over by unruly youth , gangs , and the criminal element , with an erosion of the customer base , development capital , and insurability . 
Major regional and national chain stores are replaced by mom-and-pop operations offering poorer-quality merchandise at higher prices . 
Along with the exodus of shopping opportunities is an exodus of the jobs that the major chains used to provide to community residents . 
Thus there is even more to the Vermont-Slauson Center than a good place to shop . 
This defensible commercial zone becomes , for the residents , a secure oasis in a barren urban landscape , evidence that community decay is not inevitable and that the gangs are not invincible . 
The center improves the community image to outsiders as well , and may help to arrest , or even reverse , the exodus of capital and investment . 
An additional benefit is the creation of jobs . 
This starts in the construction phase through the use of minority contractors and local workers . 
It continues through the life of the center ; the Vermont-Slauson Center has created 500 permanent private-sector jobs at a one-time cost in public funds of only $ 2,500 per job . 
As many of these jobs are filled by local residents , who move from the welfare rolls to the tax rolls , the $ 2,500-per-job public investment should repay itself in a few years . 
And that is before consideration of increased state and local revenues from taxes and fees on sales , real estate , licenses and the like . 
Profits are also plowed back into the community ; the non-profit Vermont-Slauson Economic Development Corp. receives 60 % of the profits from the Vermont-Slauson Center and uses the money to provide moderate and low-cost housing in the community -- now running into the hundreds of units -- as well as commercial and industrial development projects . 
Bradford Crowe , director of the mayor 's City Economic Development Office , says : `` There is no question that Vermont-Slauson had a halo effect on the surrounding neighborhood . 
What had been a deteriorated area with nothing but wig shops and shoe shops is now experiencing a major upgrading in the housing and commercial stock , thanks to a continuously replenished source of revitalization capital that Vermont-Slauson yields . '' 
Another benefit is that substantial percentages of the proprietors in these centers are minority businessmen and women . 
In the Grand Boulevard Plaza developed by Matanky Realty Group in Chicago 's Third Ward , opposite the Robert Taylor Homes , 29 % of the stores to date have been leased to blacks and 14 % to members of other minority groups . 
Children from the community will have worthier role models than the drug kingpins . 
So what 's the catch ? 
Primarily that putting one of these inner-city deals together takes time , patience , breadth of vision and negotiating skills that not all developers possess . 
Security costs are also quite high . 
One of these centers can involve years of negotiating with numerous public agencies , local political leaders , and citizen groups , and with prospective tenants and sources of financing . 
Suburban deals are not without their delays and complications -- inner-city deals just have more of them . 
Security at a typical Haagen inner-city center is impressive , but unobtrusive . 
The entire site is enclosed by a 6-to-8-foot-high ornamental iron fence with a small number of remote-controlled gates . 
Shrubs and flowers give it a pleasing and non-fortress-like appearance . 
Infrared motion detectors and closed-circuit TV cameras monitor the entire center ; lighting levels are three to five times the industry standard . 
The security command post , camouflaged as second-story retail space , has its own `` crow 's nest '' above the roofs of the other buildings , with a panoramic view of the entire center . 
Local law enforcement is present in a sub-station occupying space donated by the center . 
These features are also used in Matanky Realty Group 's Grand Boulevard Plaza . 
Haagen has its own large security force of well-trained and well-paid personnel on round-the-clock duty at each center . 
Security is 60 % to 70 % of the common area charges of these centers , vs. an industry average of about 15 % . 
These security costs are kept off-budget because the centers ' site acquisition , construction , and financing costs were reduced by such programs as Urban Development Action Grants , Economic Development Administration Grants , Community Development Block Grants , tax-free Industrial Development Bonds , Enterprise Zone tax write-offs , city infrastructure grants , and tax increment financing . 
Many of these programs no longer exist , or have been severely cut back . 
However , since these centers appear to pay for themselves , there is nothing to prevent state and local governments from enacting legislation with similar provisions . 
Many states already have Enterprise Zones and legislation that combines tax incentives , loans , and grants to encourage investment in depressed areas with requirements for the hiring of the unemployed and minorities . 
These programs could be expanded to focus on funds for project planning , identifying sources of funds , and for acquiring a site and preparing it . 
Combatting crime and the fear of it in inner-city commercial areas should give Enterprise Zones more success than most have enjoyed to date . 
With many suburban areas basically overbuilt with shopping centers , inner-city areas may represent a major new untapped market for investment . 
New approaches to mall design and operation make it possible to tap these markets . 
If the risks and rewards are reasonable , developers will respond . 
Government officials who wonder how important it is for them to encourage development in high-risk areas should visit Vermont-Slauson and Grand Boulevard Plaza and decide for themselves . 
The answer will be obvious . 
Mr. Titus is a researcher at the Justice Department 's National Institute of Justice . 
ATHLONE INDUSTRIES Inc. said that on Dec. 21 it will redeem $ 10 million face amount of its $ 59.3 million of 15.625 % subordinated notes outstanding , due June 1 , 1991 . 
For each $ 1,000 of notes , the maker of specialty metals , industrial fasteners and consumer products will pay $ 1,026.46 plus $ 8.68 of interest accrued from Dec. 1 . 
The company will notify holders of the notes to be redeemed . 
Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. is redemption agent . 
One company recently was listed on the New York Stock Exchange , and another will join the Big Board from the over-the-counter market this week . 
Putnam Investment Grade Municipal Trust , Boston , was listed with the symbol PGM . 
The new closed-end management investment company trades shares of beneficial interest . 
It invests primarily in tax-exempt municipal securities . 
Hibernia Corp. , a New Orleans bank holding company , will join the Big Board Thursday under HIB . 
Three companies began trading over the counter . 
Exabyte Corp. , a Boulder , Colo. , maker of high-capacity tape cartridge systems used to back up computer disk drives , started OTC trading with the symbol EXBT . 
Rally 's Inc. , a Louisville , Ky. , restaurant franchisor , started trading under RLLY . 
Sierra Tucson Cos. , Tucson , Ariz. , started trading under STSN . 
It operates various types of addiction-treatment facilities . 
Separately , on the Pacific Stock Exchange , put and call options on the common stock of Aldus Corp. started trading . 
Aldus , Seattle , makes computer software products . 
Options give a holder the right , but not the obligation , to buy or sell a security at a set price within a set period of time . 
Dow Chemical Co. said its Destec Energy Inc. unit has agreed to buy PSE Inc. , a Houston energy company , in a deal valued at about $ 115 million . 
Dow , of Midland , Mich. , said its unit will begin by Thursday a tender offer of $ 12.25 a share for all PSE common shares outstanding . 
Among other conditions , the offer depends on the Dow unit acquiring at least 66 2\/3 % of the PSE shares outstanding , the companies said in a joint statement Friday . 
PSE has about 9.2 million shares outstanding . 
The company said the approximately $ 115 million acquisition price includes its total $ 33 million of long-term debt outstanding . 
Dow said it already has agreements with Albert J. Smith Jr. , chairman and chief executive officer of PSE , and certain other officers of the company under which Dow may buy about 40 % of the PSE common shares outstanding . 
PSE is a designer and operator of energy-cogeneration facilities and had 1988 sales of $ 234 million . 
The company is owner and operator , or an equity partner , in six cogeneration facilities -- two in Texas and four in California . 
The company said recently it expects third-quarter earnings will be in range from $ 1.3 million to $ 1.7 million , or 14 cents to 18 cents a share , compared with $ 326,000 , or four cents a share , a year ago . 
If growth regains its glamour among investors , a sluggish segment of the Nasdaq over-the-counter market could show some flash . 
Some stock pickers already are targeting the OTC market , where , they say , await plenty of small - and medium-sized growth stocks . 
Best of all , they add , these growth issues , unlike their big blue-chip cousins on the New York Stock Exchange , are languishing at depressed prices . 
Growth stocks will return to favor , some analysts and money managers think , because of the jitters caused by the market 's steep slide on Oct. 13 , and because of the current swell of disappointing earnings announcements . 
Against such a backdrop , companies with proven track records of earnings gains of 20 % or so annually have extra appeal . 
`` The market will have to look for a new theme now and that theme will be a return to growth , '' declares Mary Farrell , a PaineWebber analyst . 
Among her OTC picks are Oshkosh B'Gosh and A&W Brands . 
Like many OTC growth issues , they have market values -- as measured by stock price times shares outstanding -- of roughly $ 100 million to $ 500 million . 
Some like to specialize in growth companies whose shares have n't traded publicly very long . 
These are sometimes dubbed `` emerging '' growth companies , though they also have expanding-profit track records . 
While many growth stocks are small , not all small stocks have earnings-growth momentum . 
That 's an important distinction because some analysts and brokers , who perennially predict that small stocks are about to outperform bigger issues , may use any spurt in growth issues to help them sell all small stocks . 
`` You can find some good , quality companies over the counter , '' but investors should be selective , says John Palicka , chief portfolio manager at Midco Investors , a Newark , N.J. , money management company with about $ 900 million invested in growth stocks of varying sizes . 
Mr. Palicka 's picks from the OTC market include Legent , Mail Boxes Etc. , and Payco American . 
The main argument for growth stocks is their usually superior performance in a slowing economy . 
`` If the market refocuses on earnings , we should get better valuations of growth stocks , '' says L. Keith Mullins , a growth-stock analyst at Morgan Stanley . 
Eventually , he believes , investors will be willing to pay higher prices for companies with proven track records of earnings growth . 
In anticipation of that shift , he and other analysts are encouraging their clients to buy such issues now . 
Understandably , smaller growth stocks have n't been in favor recently . 
The average issue on Standard & Poor 's 500-stock Index gained 35 % last year , Ms. Farrell of PaineWebber says . 
Smaller-stock earnings , by comparison , rose between 15 % and 20 % . 
In addition , earnings growth took a back seat to cash flow , restructuring and takeover potential , and breakup value as the preferred stock-picking standards for much of the year . 
Also , the smaller growth stocks are n't widely traded , and so are harder to buy and sell quickly than blue chips . 
As a result , Morgan Stanley 's Index of 40 Emerging Growth Stocks -- most of which are in the OTC market -- is up only 13 % for the year , while the Dow Jones Industrial Average has leaped 24 % and the S&P 500 has grown 25 % . 
The Nasdaq Composite has gained 23 % this year , but that 's largely due to the 100 largest nonfinancial stocks , which have soared 30 % . 
Some investors are skeptical of growth stocks because investing in them means ignoring that maxim found in the fine print of some investment advertisements -- that past performance is n't indicative of future results . 
`` People are naturally suspicious of them , '' says Mr. Mullins of Morgan Stanley . 
Among his favorites in his firm 's index are Legent , Silicon Graphics and Novell . 
However , more money managers are reassured that profit is regaining importance . 
Mark Schoeppner , portfolio manager at Pittsburgh-based Quaker Capital Management , says that in reaction to nervousness about debt-laden buy-out transactions , analysts and investors now appear to be `` valuing stock based on future earnings as opposed to the amount of debt the company can support . '' 
Barney Hallingby , managing director of research at Hambrecht & Quist , also believes earnings growth is beginning to play a greater part in investors ' buying decisions . 
On Friday , Hambrecht & Quist added St. Jude Medical to the list of 20 stocks it strongly recommends . 
The opinion is largely based on the company 's earnings momentum , Mr. Hallingby says . 
St. Jude 's market value on Nasdaq exceeds $ 1 billion , so it is n't a small stock . 
The medical devices maker 's earnings rose nearly 35 % in 1987 from 1986 , and 75 % in 1988 . 
Kurt Kruger , who follows the stock for Hambrecht & Quist , anticipates that the company 's net income will grow 51 % to $ 2.15 a share this year . 
St. Jude finished up 1\/4 to 44 1\/2 on Friday . 
Friday 's Market Activity 
The Nasdaq Composite Index eased 0.13 to 470.67 . 
The composite finished up 0.7 % from last Friday 's close . 
It was a busy week for OTC stocks . 
Friday 's volume totaled 158.2 million shares ; the daily average for the week was a bustling 176.7 million . 
Valley National lost 1 3\/8 to 17 1\/8 on volume of 1.9 million shares . 
The company reported a big third-quarter loss on Thursday . 
Merchants Bank of New York lost 1 to 106 after reporting that its third-quarter net income fell to $ 1.62 a share from last year 's $ 1.67 a share . 
Eliot Savings Bank lost 7\/8 to 1 5\/8 after reporting that it had a $ 4.8 million loss in the latest third quarter mostly because of loan-loss provisions . 
In the 1988 quarter , the bank earned $ 1.1 million . 
One bank stock was a winner . 
BanPonce jumped 4 1\/2 to 47 3\/4 after agreeing to be acquired by Banco Popular de Puerto Rico for $ 56.25 a share . 
Banco Popular , meanwhile , dropped 1 1\/4 to 21 1\/2 . 
Sierra Tucson , an initial public offering , made the most active list . 
The company 's shares began trading at 12 1\/2 , up from its initial offering price of 12 , and closed at 13 . 
Sierra Tucson operates an addiction treatment center . 
Among declining issues , a weak earnings outlook drove Groundwater Technology down 6 1\/4 to 24 . 
The company said results for its second quarter ended Oct. 28 could drop as much as 20 % below the 30 cents a share reported in the year-earlier quarter . 
Medstone International plummeted 3 1\/4 to 7 1\/4 . 
A Food and Drug Administration advisory panel has asked that Medstone perform more studies on its device to treat gallstones . 
Qintex Entertainment dropped 2 5\/8 to 1 1\/2 after seeking protection from creditor lawsuits under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code for itself and its two operating subsidiaries , Hal Roach Studios and Qintex Productions . 
Raymond Corp. lost 1 to 10 after it said late Thursday that it will take a $ 4.4 million charge in its third quarter for reserves to cover potential charges in connection with the closing and sale of a manufacturing plant . 
As a result , the company has suspended its quarterly dividend . 
McCaw Cellular Communications and its target , LIN Broadcasting , were active . 
LIN added 5\/8 to 110 5\/8 and McCaw lost 1\/4 to 41 . 
McCaw said it has secured commitments from three banks to help finance its $ 125-a-share bid for 22 million of Lin 's shares . 
McCaw has called for a `` fair auction '' of LIN , which earlier entered a stock-swap merger pact with BellSouth . 
Following the release of the company 's fourth-quarter earnings , Apple Computer dropped 3\/4 to 48 on volume of more than 2.3 million shares . 
Apple earned $ 161.1 million , or $ 1.24 a share , in the quarter , including $ 48 million from the sale of its Adobe Systems stock . 
The following were among Friday 's offerings and pricings in the U.S. and non-U.S. capital markets , with terms and syndicate manager , as compiled by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report : 
Chicago & North Western Acquisition Corp. -- $ 475 million of senior subordinated resettable debentures , due Oct. 15 , 2001 , priced at par to yield 14.75 % . 
The coupon will be reset in one year at a rate that will give the issue a market value of 101 . 
However , the maximum coupon rate on the issue when it is reset can only be 15.5 % . 
Debenture holders will also receive the equivalent of 10 % of the common stock of CNW Holdings . 
The equity kicker is not attached to the offering , but underwriters said it will be offered after a filing for 68,548 common shares of CNW Holdings is declared effective by the Securities & Exchange Commission . 
The issue is noncallable for five years and has a sinking fund starting in 2000 to retire 50 % of the issue before maturity . 
Rated single-B-2 by Moody 's Investors Service Inc. and single-B-minus by Standard & Poor 's Corp. , the issue will be sold through underwriters led by Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp . 
Tokuyama Soda Co . ( Japan ) -- $ 200 million of Eurobonds due Nov. 9 , 1993 , with equity-purchase warrants , indicating a 4 % coupon at par , via Nomura International Ltd . 
Each $ 5,000 bond carries one warrant , exercisable from Nov. 28 , 1989 , through Oct. 28 , 1993 , to buy company shares at an expected premium of 2 1\/2 % to the closing share price when terms are fixed Oct. 27 . 
For bankers and regulators , Arizona is looking more like Texas every day . 
On Friday , Los Angeles-based First Interstate Bancorp said it expects a net loss of $ 16 million for the third quarter of 1989 because of hemorrhaging at its First Interstate Bank of Arizona unit . 
First Interstate said the unit , bludgeoned by Arizona 's worsening real-estate woes , will have a $ 174 million loss for the quarter . 
First Interstate took a huge $ 350 million provision for loan losses at the Arizona bank . 
It charged off an estimated $ 200 million of Arizona loans , leaving the unit with a reserve for future losses of $ 255 million , about 61 % of its $ 416 million of troubled loans and repossessed real estate . 
First Interstate made the move under pressure from regulators . 
The action capped a spurt of grim Arizona banking news for the third quarter , and emphatically signaled that Arizona is challenging Texas 's long reign as banking 's busiest graveyard . 
Earlier last week , Valley National Corp. , the state 's largest locally owned banking company , reported a $ 72.2 million loss and suspended its dividend . 
Pinnacle West Capital Corp. , which has been wrangling with regulators for months over what to do about Pinnacle 's moribund Merabank thrift unit , suspended its dividend and reported a 91 % plunge in third-quarter net income . 
Security Pacific Corp. said third-quarter credit losses surged a third to $ 109 million , mainly because of sour Arizona real-estate loans . 
New York-based Chase Manhattan Corp. took an $ 85 million Arizona-related charge . 
Furthermore , the regulatory maneuvering behind First Interstate 's loss suggests regulators have concluded that lenders ' reserves are far too low to absorb their future Arizona losses and are forcing bankers to do something about it . 
Examiners from the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency had been combing through First Interstate 's real-estate portfolio since last month ; they first recommended that First Interstate take a provision that was less than the eventual $ 350 million third-quarter hit . 
When First Interstate balked , arguing that the figure was too high , regulators responded by raising their recommendation to $ 350 million . 
`` At that point , { First Interstate } decided it was the better part of valor not to negotiate further , '' said one industry official close to the talks . 
Thomas P. Marrie , chief financial officer , would n't comment about the details of the negotiations . 
He said the provision `` was n't forced upon us , but the regulators made it very clear what they thought was an appropriate number . '' 
The tough regulatory stance portends large future losses , especially at the state 's thrifts . 
At least six of Arizona 's 12 savings and loan institutions have either been taken over by the government 's conservatorship program or are essentially insolvent ; they are sitting on enormous unrecognized losses . 
For example , Western Savings & Loan Association , which is now in conservatorship , had tangible capital-assets minus liabilities -- of a negative $ 357.4 million at June 30 . 
It had a $ 258.9 million loss in the second quarter . 
Yet it still held $ 916.3 million of repossessed real estate , for which it maintains no reserves whatsoever . 
It also had $ 479.7 million of past-due loans ; its level of reserves against those was n't immediately available , though it is believed to be small . 
The rapid deterioration of the Arizona thrifts only adds to the ever-swelling cost of the government 's massive thrift bailout , officially estimated at about $ 166 billion . 
Together , the six government-controlled or essentially insolvent Arizona thrifts have tangible capital of a negative $ 1.5 billion , foreclosed property of $ 1.8 billion and pastdue loans of $ 1.63 billion . 
They have no reserves against the real estate , and their reserves against the loans are miniscule compared with the levels of reserves banks are moving to set up . 
The thrifts had a combined loss of $ 487.8 million in the second quarter . 
Other lenders have been recovering only 50 cents to 60 cents on the dollar on foreclosed Arizona property , if they can sell it at all . 
All this havoc is the result of one of the worst busts in Arizona 's boom-and-bust history , compounded by some of the usual suspects in 1980s banking debacles : greed , fraud and plain bad banking . 
In the late 1970s and early 1980s , lenders and developers poured money into office buildings , condominiums and massive tracts of raw desert land , confident that Arizona 's population would grow at annual rates of 4 % to 6 % for years to come . 
Now , annual population growth is running at about 2 % a year , some desert tracts bought three years ago for $ 90,000 an acre are being sold at $ 25,000 an acre and Phoenix has a seven-year supply of unoccupied office space . 
`` It 's horrible to say , but it 's unfortunate that earthquake was n't in Phoenix -- it might have knocked out some of our empty buildings , '' said C.W. Jackson , a prominent Arizona businessman with interests in real estate , banking and many other businesses . 
Many Arizona real-estate experts think the worst may be yet to come . 
Ralph Shattuck , publisher of Foreclosure Update newsletter , said foreclosures have climbed to about 1,482 a month just in Maricopa County , where Phoenix is located . 
That 's up from about 687 a month in 1985 , and it 's accelerating : So far this month , foreclosures are averaging about 85 a day . 
`` It 's frightening , '' Mr. Shattuck said . 
Moreover , Mr. Shattuck and others said residential real estate , which had remained fairly strong through most of the downturn , is beginning to comprise more and more of the foreclosures . 
And the generally frail condition of Arizona 's lenders means there is little capital available in the state to shore up the economy and slow down the slide . 
`` It 's reasonable to say there is not a solvent S&L in the state and the amount of viable bank capital is very low , '' said Mr. Jackson . 
`` We 're going to see another big wave of failures and defaults between now and year-end ... . 
The only thing a lot of these lenders can get out of their mouth now is : ` Pay me in 60 days . ' '' 
First Interstate had a $ 214.4 million loss in 1988 's third quarter , mainly from writedowns and reserves connected with its Texas operations . 
For the six months ended June 30 , it reported net income of $ 234.3 million , or $ 4.83 a share , including $ 46 million from tax credits and accounting changes . 
The bank 's Arizona unit holds about $ 6 billion of First Interstate 's $ 50 billion of assets . 
Mr. Marrie said the bank expects Arizona real-estate prices , which plummeted 40 % over the last year , to fall another 20 % before stabilizing . 
Some in Arizona think that may be optimistic . 
First Interstate said its operations outside of Arizona `` achieved results as expected for the quarter , '' but did n't specify the results . 
First Interstate stock closed at $ 57.625 , down 25 cents , in composite trading Friday on the New York Stock Exchange . 
Since its unsuccessful bid for BankAmerica Corp. in 1986 , the bank has undertaken a major restructuring in an effort to cut costs and boost performance , but many industry officials believe it may be ripe for a takeover bid , especially with interstate banking set to begin in California in 1991 . 
Mr. Marrie said the problems in Arizona have only `` increased our resolve to continue to make our restructuring even more effective . '' 
Separately , Standard & Poor 's Corp. lowered its ratings on Valley National Corp. 's senior debt to double-B from double-B-plus , affecting about $ 300 million of long-term debt . 
S&P also lowered ratings on unsecured deposits and issues backed by a letter of credit from the bank holding company 's principal unit , Valley National Bank of Arizona . 
The ratings service said the downgrades reflect the continued slide in the company 's financial condition . 
A spokesman for Phoenix , Ariz.-based Valley National , said the concern will be able to withstand the current downturn in Arizona real estate . 
Commercial paper holders have reinvested their funds , he said , and consumer deposits have been up in the last few days . 
Immunex Corp. said its scientists isolated a molecule which may hold potential as a treatment for disruptions of the immune-system , ranging from organ-transplant rejection , to allergies and asthma . 
The molecule is the mouse version of a protein called the interleukin-4 receptor . 
IL-4 is a hormone which directs the growth and function of white blood cells involved in the body 's immune response . 
The IL-4 receptor on the surface of such cells receives the hormone 's message to rally the body 's defense . 
But in certain conditions such as autoimmune diseases and allergies and transplant rejection , doctors would like to damp the immune response so such cells do n't touch off harmful inflammatory reactions or cell destruction . 
A soluble form of the receptor might turn off a specific part of the immune response without general immune suppression , the company said . 
The IL-4 receptor is one of five such receptors to be developed and tested by Receptech Corp. , a spinoff of Immunex , through a proposed $ 30 million initial public offering . 
Immunex will contract with the spinoff to provide the research , development and initial testing of the new agents . 
Immunex will have the option to buy back Receptech shares after five years . 
The following issues were recently filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission : 
Heller Financial Inc. , an indirect subsidiary of Fuji Bank Ltd. , shelf offering of up to $ 1 billion debt securities and warrants . 
Jason Overseas Ltd. , proposed offering of five million common shares , via Smith Barney & Co. and Mabon Nugent & Co . 
MCI Communications Corp. , shelf offering of up to $ 750 million of debt securities via Merrill Lynch Capital Markets , Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. , Goldman , Sachs & Co. , and Salomon Brothers Inc . 
Millicom Inc. , offering of $ 60 million subordinated exchangeable debentures , via Bear , Stearns & Co. Inc . 
Union Tank Car Co. , offering of $ 100 million of equipment trust certificates , via Salomon Brothers . 
Conner Peripherals Inc. , which has a near-monopoly on a key part used in many portable computers , is on target to surpass Compaq Computer Corp. as the fastest-growing start-up manufacturing firm in U.S. business history . 
Conner dominates the market for hard-disk drives used to store data in laptop computers . 
It said yesterday that net income for its third quarter soared 72 % to $ 11.8 million , or 28 cents a share , from $ 6.8 million , or 19 cents a share , in the year-ago period . 
Its revenue totaled $ 184.4 million , an increase of 172 % from $ 67.8 million a year ago . 
For the nine months , the San Jose , Calif.-based company said net income jumped 84 % to $ 26.9 million , or 69 cents a share , from $ 14.6 million , or 43 cents a share . 
Revenue nearly tripled to $ 479 million , from $ 160 million . 
Analysts expect Conner 's earnings to reach roughly $ 40 million , or $ 1 to $ 1.05 a share , on sales of $ 650 million , for 1989 , the company 's third full year in business . 
That 's a faster growth rate than reported by Compaq , which did n't post similar results until its fourth year , in 1986 . 
But Compaq had achieved that level of sales faster than any previous manufacturing start-up . 
Conner 's performance is closely tied to the burgeoning demand for battery-operated computers , the computer industry 's fastest-growing segment . 
Since its inception , Conner has both benefited from and helped make possible the rapid spread of portable computers by selling storage devices that consume five to 10 times less electricity than drives used in desktop machines . 
Today , Conner controls an estimated 90 % of the hard-disk drive market for laptop computers . 
The company supplies drives to Compaq and Zenith Data Systems , the top two U.S. manufacturers of laptops , and to Toshiba Corp. , NEC Corp. and Sharp Corp. , the leading Japanese laptop makers . 
`` They 've had this field to themselves for over a year now , and they 've been greatly rewarded , '' said Bob Katsive , an analyst at Disk / Trend Inc. , a market researcher in Los Altos , Calif . 
In the coming months , however , this is likely to change . 
Next month , Seagate Technology , which is the dominant supplier of hard-disk drives for personal computers , plans to introduce its first family of low-power drives for battery-operated computers . 
And the Japanese are likely to keep close on Conner 's heels . 
`` They are going to catch up , '' said David Claridge , an analyst with Hambrecht & Quist . 
Both Toshiba and NEC already produce hard-disk drives , and Sony also is studying the field , Mr. Claridge said . 
But Conner is n't standing still . 
Yesterday , the company introduced four products , three of which are aimed at a hot new class of computers called notebooks . 
Each of the three drives uses a mere 1.5 watts of power and one weighs just 5.5 ounces . 
`` Most of our competitors are announcing products based on our ( older ) products , '' said Finis Conner , chief executive officer and founder of the firm that bears his name . 
`` We continue to develop products faster than anyone else can . '' 
These new products could account for as much as 35 % of the company 's business in 1990 , Mr. Conner estimated . 
`` We 're not afraid of obsoleting some of our old stuff to stay ahead of the competition , '' he said . 
Conner already is shipping its new drives . 
Last week , for instance , Compaq introduced its first notebook computer to rave reviews . 
Conner is supplying hard-disk drives for the machine , which weighs only six pounds and fits in a briefcase . 
From its inception , Conner has targeted the market for battery-operated machines , building hard-disk drives that are smaller and use far less power than those offered by competitors such as Seagate . 
The availability of these drives , in turn , boosted demand for laptop computers , whose usefulness had been limited because of lack of storage . 
Conner also makes hard-disk drives for desktop computers and is a major supplier to Compaq , which as of July owned 40 % of Conner 's stock . 
Sales to Compaq represented 26 % of Conner 's business in its third quarter , compared with 42 % in the year-ago period . 
Move over , pornographic phone services : A legal service with a `` 900 '' number has been launched in California . 
A Newport Beach law firm started the pay-as-you-go legal service , called Telelawyer , using MCI Communication Corp. 's toll-tele-phone service . 
Cane & Associates touts its $ 2-a-minute service as the `` cheapest legal hour you 'll ever find . '' 
Though the service is available only in California , Telelawyer founder Michael Cane says he plans to franchise it in other states . 
He says his aim is to reach people who are bedridden , have no access to transportation , ca n't find a lawyer to take their case or simply ca n't afford lawyers ' consultation fees . 
Mr. Cane stresses that he is n't using the telephone to lure clients to his doorstep . 
`` We will only deal with clients on the phone , '' he says . 
`` We have no in-office business . '' 
Telelawyer is apparently the only telephone service that offers the telephone equivalent of an office visit . 
Local bar associations in some states have numbers that provide free tape-recorded messages explaining certain areas of the law . 
There also are `` 800 '' hotlines which refer people to lawyers , usually personal-injury specialists , for in-office consultation . 
When a caller reaches Telelawyer by dialing 900-TELELAW , a receptionist refers the call to one of six attorneys . 
In an effort to determine whether a caller has reason to sue , Cane lawyers review documents and perform research , if necessary , with the help of three law clerks and several support staffers . 
There is no charge for research -- only for time on the phone . 
If the matter requires further legal work or litigation , Mr. Cane says , his lawyers may refer the client to a law firm . 
But he says Cane & Associates does n't receive referral fees . 
So far , says Mr. Cane , most calls have involved landlord-tenant problems , tax problems , divorce , and probate questions . 
The firm is getting about 50 calls a day , and the average call lasts about 15 minutes . 
Out of the $ 2 charge , the law firm pockets about $ 1.55 . 
JURY CONVICTS congressman in connection with Wedtech Corp. scandal . 
A federal court jury in New York found U.S. Rep. Robert Garcia ( D. , N.Y . ) and his wife , Jane Lee Garcia , guilty of extorting $ 76,000 from Wedtech in return for official acts by the congressman . 
The jury also convicted them of extortion in obtaining a $ 20,000 , interest-free loan from a Wedtech officer . 
The jury found them guilty of conspiracy in obtaining the payments , some of which were disguised as fees for consulting services from Mrs. Garcia . 
Wedtech , which became embroiled in political-corruption cases that eventually led to its demise , formerly was a minority-owned South Bronx , N.Y. , defense contractor . 
Edward J.M. Little , one of the assistant U.S. attorneys who prosecuted the case , said the Garcia trial `` is the last of the Wedtech prosecutions . '' 
Mr. Little said more than 20 people have been convicted in the Wedtech cases , including former U.S. Rep. Mario Biaggi ( D. , N.Y . ) . 
Lawyers for the Garcias said they plan to appeal . 
Mr. Garcia , who represents New York 's 18th congressional district , which includes the Bronx , said he has n't decided whether he will resign . 
`` In the next few weeks , I will be consulting with my political advisers and with the Democratic leaders about the best way of preserving the interests of my constituents , '' said Mr. Garcia , 56 years old . 
Mrs. Garcia , 49 , formerly was a member of Mr. Garcia 's congressional staff . 
The Garcias were cleared of four other felony counts , involving the receipt of bribes and gratuities . 
U.S. Judge Leonard B. Sand set the Garcias ' sentencing for Jan. 5 . 
FIVE SHEA & GOULD PARTNERS are leaving to form a new firm . 
The new firm , Hutton Ingram Yuzek Gainen Carroll & Bertolotti , will be based in New York . 
The five partners who resigned from Shea & Gould late last week are Tom Hutton , Sam Ingram , Dean Yuzek , Daniel Carroll and Ernest Bertolotti . 
They will be joined by Larry Gainen , who resigned from the firm of LePatner , Gainen & Block . 
Howard Rubenstein , a New York publicist who represents Shea & Gould , said , `` Shea & Gould understands they 're leaving because they wanted a different environment -- a smaller firm they would be principals of . '' 
Mr. Rubenstein said the five , who were n't on Shea & Gould 's management committee , `` are leaving on good terms . '' 
He said Shea & Gould held a number of discussions with the five partners during the past few weeks to get them to stay but that the five were firmly committed to running their own firm . 
Hutton Ingram will have a general corporate , securities , real-estate and litigation practice , and a substantial practice serving the professional-design community . 
DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS against lawyers open to public in Illinois . 
While investigations into lawyer misconduct will remain secret , the public will be notified once a formal complaint is filed against an attorney . 
The actual disciplinary hearings will be public . 
In addition , Illinois attorneys will lose the right to sue clients who file malicious complaints against them . 
Non-lawyers will be added to the inquiry panels that look into allegations of misconduct . 
Illinois joins 36 other states that allow public participation in attorney-disciplinary proceedings and 32 states that open disciplinary hearings to the public , according to the American Bar Association . 
One vocal critic of the changes , Chicago lawyer Warren Lupel , says non-lawyers should n't be on the inquiry panels because they are unlikely to appreciate the nuances of attorney-client relationships . 
In addition , he says , publishing the names of lawyers who are facing charges unnecessarily subjects them to public derogation . 
Nevertheless , Mr. Lupel anticipates no legal action to reverse the Illinois Supreme Court 's decision to institute the changes . 
`` There 's no constitutional right involved in the rule change , '' he says . 
`` You do n't have a right to practice . 
You only have a privilege to practice . '' 
DREXEL BURNHAM LAMBERT Inc. agreed to pay a $ 50,000 fine to Delaware , the 26th state to settle with Drexel in the wake of the firm 's guilty plea to federal insider-trading charges . 
Drexel does n't have a Delaware office , but the New York firm has been negotiating settlements that would allow it to operate freely nationwide despite its record as an admitted felon . 
The firm has said it expects to pay $ 11.5 million overall to settle with states . 
Drexel pleaded guilty in September to six felony counts of securities and mail fraud ; it also made a $ 650 million civil settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission . 
Philip Morris Cos. , whose Benson & Hedges cigarette brand has been losing market share , has asked at least one other agency to try its hand at creative work for the big account , which has been at Wells Rich Greene Inc. since 1966 . 
Executives close to Philip Morris said that the tobacco and food giant has asked Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide Inc. , a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi Co. , and possibly others to work on creative ideas for the account . 
Several executives said another potential contender is WPP Group 's Ogilvy & Mather agency , which works on some other Philip Morris products . 
Both Philip Morris and Backer Spielvogel declined to comment . 
A spokeswoman for Ogilvy & Mather said the agency does n't comment on `` idle speculation . '' 
Also mentioned as a contender was TBWA Advertising , but the company denied it was participating . 
The loss of the cigarette account would be a severe blow to Wells Rich . 
Benson & Hedges has been one of its most high-visibility campaigns , as well as one of its largest clients . 
The account billed almost $ 60 million last year , according to Leading National Advertisers . 
But Philip Morris has scaled back ad spending on the brand over the past year , industry executives said , and it now bills about $ 30 million to $ 40 million . 
Industry executives said Philip Morris had asked the other agencies to create campaigns in a bid to stop the brand 's slipping market share . 
According to John Maxwell , an analyst at Wheat First Securities , Richmond , Va. , Benson & Hedges has slipped from 4.7 % of the cigarette market in 1985 to just 4.1 % after the second quarter of this year . 
The brand is No. 7 overall in the cigarette business , Mr. Maxwell said . 
The slip has come despite high-profile ads created by Wells Rich , including one picturing a young man clad only in pajama bottoms interrupting a festive brunch . 
That ad generated so much publicity that a trade magazine launched a contest for its readers to guess who the guy was and what he was doing . 
Wells Rich first popularized the Benson & Hedges brand more than 20 years ago with ads portraying , among other things , an elevator door closing on a passenger 's cigarette . 
The brand early on achieved an upscale appeal -- a trait that some analysts believe is partly responsible for its staid performance . 
Philip Morris , trying to revive the Benson & Hedges franchise , put the account up for review in 1986 . 
Wells Rich Greene , however , in an effort directed by Mary Wells Lawrence , emerged the victor of the review and retained the business . 
Kenneth Olshan , Wells Rich 's chairman , did n't return phone calls seeking comment . 
While Wells Rich recently picked up Hertz Corp. 's $ 25 million to $ 30 million account , it has lost a number of big accounts this year , including the $ 20 million to $ 25 million Cadbury-Schweppes Canada Dry and Sunkist accounts , the $ 18 million Procter & Gamble Co . Sure deodorant account and the $ 10 million Polo / Ralph Lauren business . 
Its victories include more than $ 30 million in Sheraton Corp. business and an assignment from Dun & Bradstreet worth $ 5 million to $ 10 million . 
This city is girding for gridlock today as hundreds of thousands of commuters avoid travel routes ravaged by last week 's earthquake . 
Estimates of damage in the six-county San Francisco Bay area neared $ 5 billion , excluding the cost of repairing the region 's transportation system . 
The Bay Bridge , the main artery into San Francisco from the east , will be closed for at least several weeks . 
Part of the bridge collapsed in the quake , which registered 6.9 on the Richter scale . 
The bridge normally carries 250,000 commuters a day . 
Also , most of the ramps connecting the city to its main link to the south , the 101 freeway , have been closed for repairs . 
The Bay Area Rapid Transit system , which runs subway trains beneath the bay , is braced for a doubling of its daily regular ridership to 300,000 . 
BART has increased service to 24 hours a day in preparation for the onslaught . 
Most unusual will be water-borne commuters from the East Bay towns of Oakland and Berkeley . 
For the first time in 32 years , ferry service has been restored between the East Bay and San Francisco . 
The Red and White Fleet , which operates regular commuter ferry service to and from Marin County , and tourist tours of the bay , is offering East Bay commuters a chance to ride the waves for the price of $ 10 round-trip . 
That tariff is too stiff for some Financial District wage earners . 
`` I 'll stay with BART , '' said one secretary , swallowing her fears about using the transbay tube . 
Officials expect the Golden Gate Bridge to be swamped with an extra load of commuters , including East Bay residents making a long detour . 
`` We 're anticipating quite a traffic crunch , '' said one official . 
About 23,000 people typically travel over the Golden Gate Bridge during commute hours . 
About 130,000 vehicles cross during a 24-hour period . 
Meetings canceled by Apple Computer Inc. 's European sales force and by other groups raised the specter of empty hotel rooms and restaurants . 
It also raised hackles of the city 's tourism boosters . 
`` Other cities are calling { groups booked here for tours and conferences } and -- not to be crass -- stealing our booking list , '' said Scott Shafer , a spokesman for Mayor Art Agnos . 
City officials stuck by their estimate of $ 2 billion in damage to the quake-shocked city . 
The other five Bay area counties have increased their total damage estimates to $ 2.8 billion . 
All estimates exclude highway repair , which could exceed $ 1 billion . 
Among the expensive unknowns are stretches of elevated freeway in San Francisco that were closed because of quake-inflicted damage . 
The most worrisome stretch is 1.2 miles of waterfront highway known as the Embarcadero Freeway . 
Until it was closed Tuesday , it had provided the quickest series of exits for commuters from the Bay Bridge heading into the Financial District . 
Engineers say it will take at least eight months to repair the Embarcadero structure . 
As part of the quake recovery effort , the city Building Department has surveyed about 3,000 buildings , including all of the Financial District 's high-rises . 
The preliminary conclusion from a survey of 200 downtown high-rises is that `` we were incredibly lucky , '' said Lawrence Kornfield , San Francisco 's chief building inspector . 
While many of these buildings sustained heavy damage , little of that involved major structural damage . 
City building codes require construction that can resist temblors . 
In England , Martin Leach , a spokesman for Lloyd 's of London , said the insurance market has n't yet been able to estimate the total potential claims from the disaster . 
`` The extent of the claims wo n't be known for some time , '' Mr. Leach said . 
On Friday , during a visit to California to survey quake damage , President Bush promised to `` meet the federal government 's obligation '' to assist relief efforts . 
California officials plan to ask Congress for $ 3 billion or more of federal aid , in the form of grants and low-interest loans . 
The state has a $ 1 billion reserve , and is expected to add $ 1 billion to that fund in the next year . 
Some of that money will be available for highway repair and special emergency aid , but members of the legislature are also mulling over a temporary state gasoline tax to raise money for earthquake relief . 
However , state initiatives restrict the ability of the legislature to raise such taxes unless the voters approve in a statewide referendum . 
G. Christian Hill and Ken Wells contributed to this article . 
Bond Corp . Holdings Ltd. posted a loss for fiscal 1989 of 980.2 million Australian dollars ( US$ 762.4 million ) , the largest in Australian corporate history . 
That loss compared with a year-earlier profit of A$ 273.5 million . 
In preliminary , unaudited results reported Friday , Bond Corp. also posted an operating loss of A$ 814.1 million for the year ended June 30 , compared with operating profit of A$ 354.7 million a year earlier . 
Operating revenue rose 69 % to A$ 8.48 billion from A$ 5.01 billion . 
But the net interest bill jumped 85 % to A$ 686.7 million from A$ 371.1 million . 
Bond Corp. has interests in brewing , media and communications , natural resources and property . 
Much of Bond Corp. 's losses stemmed from one-time write-downs of the value of some of Bond Corp. 's assets and those of its units . 
The results included a A$ 453.4 million write-off of future income-tax benefits and a provision for a loss of A$ 149.5 million on the sale of a stake of about 20 % in Lonrho PLC . 
However , Bond Corp. said the tax benefits remain available and might be used later . 
Earnings before interest and tax from brewing dived 50 % to A$ 123.8 million from A$ 247.3 million . 
The company said the general financial performance of its U.S. brewing operations , G. Heileman Brewing Co. , was `` disappointing , and this has been reflected in the results . '' 
Bond Corp. 's shares closed Friday before news of the results at 28 Australian cents a share , up one Australian cent . 
The staggering losses cap a tumultuous year for Alan Bond and his flagship , Bond Corp . 
Only a year ago , the chairman of Bond Corp. , who controls about 58 % of the company , appeared to be building a war chest to attack some big companies . 
Now Bond Corp. has agreed to sell at least half its Australian brewing assets . 
It has sold billions of dollars of other assets and has more on the block . 
But in a TV interview Sunday Mr. Bond said , `` We 've taken a big loss . 
We 've taken it on the chin . 
But we 're out there and we 're going to stay in business . 
Bond Corp. signaled it will focus on building its domestic and international media and communications businesses . 
It said it will look at opportunities in brewing , property and energy resources to the extent consistent with the dominant objective of manageable debt-to-assets ratios . 
The result `` will ultimately be a very different group in size and structure , '' Bond Corp. directors said in a statement . 
Some analysts contend the total writeoffs should have been much greater , and Bond Corp. 's auditors cited a list of several assets and deals about which there is `` uncertainty '' regarding the current value and potential impact on the firm . 
Bond Corp. said the acknowledged losses mean net asset backing is in the red to the tune of 53 Australian cents a share , vs. positive asset backing of A$ 1.92 a share a year ago . 
Still , the directors said , `` Having fully considered all aspects of the company 's state of affairs and future cash flows , the directors confirm absolutely that the company is solvent . '' 
Indeed , in a note to the results , directors said if the `` true worth '' of some of the group 's assets were taken into account instead of using book values , the negative net asset backing a share would turn into `` a substantial positive '' one . 
The Bakersfield Supermarket went out of business last May . 
The reason was not high interest rates or labor costs . 
Nor was there a shortage of customers in the area , the residential Inwood section of northern Manhattan . 
The business closed when the owner was murdered by robbers . 
The owner was Israel Ortiz , a 29-year-old entrepreneur and father of two . 
In his first year of operating the store he bought for $ 220,000 , Mr. Ortiz was robbed at least twice at gunpoint . 
The first time he was shot in the hand as he chased the robbers outside . 
The second time he identified two robbers , who were arrested and charged . 
Two weeks later -- perhaps in retaliation -- Mr. Ortiz was shot three times in the back , during what police classified as a third robbery attempt . 
That was his reward for working until 11 p.m. seven days a week to cover his $ 3,000 a month rent . 
For providing what his customers described as very personal and helpful service . 
For creating a focus for neighborhood life . 
Israel Ortiz is only one of the thousands of entrepreneurs and their employees who will be injured or killed by crime this year . 
The U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics reports that almost 2 % of all retail-sales workers suffer injuries from crime each year , almost twice the national average and about four times the rate for teachers , truck drivers , medical workers and door-to-door salespeople . 
Only a few other occupations have higher reported rates of criminal injury , such as police , bartenders and taxi drivers . 
Yet these figures show only the most visible part of the problem . 
Recent data from New York City provide more of the picture . 
While by no means the highest crime community in the country , New York is a prime example of a city where crime strangles small-business development . 
A survey of small businesses there was conducted this spring by Interface , a policy research organization . 
It gave 1,124 businesses a questionnaire and analyzed 353 responses . 
The survey found that over a three-year period 22 % of the firms said employees or owners had been robbed on their way to or from work or while on the job . 
Seventeen percent reported their customers being robbed . 
Crime was the reason that 26 % reported difficulty recruiting personnel and that 19 % said they were considering moving . 
More than one-third of the responding businesses said they suffer from drug dealing and loitering near their premises . 
In Brooklyn and the Bronx , one out of four commercial firms is burglarized each year . 
Industrial neighborhoods fare even worse , with burglary rates twice the citywide average . 
Crime is clearly more deadly to small-scale entrepreneurship than to big businesses . 
Two decades ago , the Small Business Administration reported Yale Prof. Albert Reiss 's landmark study of crime against 2,500 small businesses drawn from national IRS records . 
He found that monetary crime losses , as a proportion of gross receipts , were 37 times higher for small businesses than for large ones . 
The New York study 's companies averaged 27 employees ; their annual crime losses averaged about $ 15,000 , with an additional $ 8,385 annual cost in security -- enough money to hire at least one more worker . 
The costs of crime may also be enough to destroy a struggling business . 
Whatever the monetary crime losses , they may not be nearly as important to entrepreneurs as the risk of personal injury . 
After repeated gun robberies , some entrepreneurs may give up a business out of fear for their lives . 
One Washington couple recently sold their liquor store after 34 years in business that included four robbery deaths and 16 robberies or burglaries on the premises . 
These findings illustrate the vicious cycle that National Institute of Justice Director James K. Stewart calls `` crime causing poverty . '' 
Underclass neighborhoods offer relatively few employment opportunities , contributing to the poverty of local residents . 
Small neighborhood businesses could provide more jobs , if crime were not so harmful to creating and maintaining those businesses . 
This may help explain why small businesses create 65 % of all jobs nationally , but only 22 % of jobs in a crime-ridden city like New York . 
Bigger business can often better afford to minimize the cost of crime . 
The New York study found that the cost of security measures in firms with fewer than five employees was almost $ 1,000 per worker , compared with one-third that amount for firms with more than 10 employees . 
The shift of retailing to large shopping centers has created even greater economies of scale for providing low-crime business environments . 
Private security guards and moonlighting police can invoke the law of trespass to regulate access to these quasi-public places . 
Since 1984 , in fact , revenues of the 10 largest guard companies , primarily serving such big businesses , have increased by almost 62 % . 
Few small neighborhood businesses , however , can afford such protection , even in collaboration with other local merchants . 
In the neighborhoods with the highest crime rates , small business generally relies on the public police force for protection . 
This creates several problems . 
One is that there are not enough police to satisfy small businesses . 
The number one proposal for reducing crime in the New York survey was to put more police on foot or scooter patrol , suggested by more than two-thirds of the respondents . 
Only 22 % supported private security patrols funded by the merchants themselves . 
A second problem is the persistent frustration of false alarms , which can make urban police less than enthusiastic about responding to calls from small businesses . 
Only half the New York small businesses surveyed , for their part , are satisfied with the police response they receive . 
Some cities , including New York , have experimented with special tax districts for commercial areas that provide additional patrols funded by local businesses . 
But this raises added cost barriers to urban entrepreneurship . 
Another solution cities might consider is giving special priority to police patrols of small-business areas . 
For cities losing business to suburban shopping centers , it may be a wise business investment to help keep those jobs and sales taxes within city limits . 
Increased patrolling of business zones makes sense because urban crime is heavily concentrated in such `` hot spots '' of pedestrian density . 
With National Institute of Justice support , the Minneapolis police and the Crime Control Institute are currently testing the effects of such a strategy , comparing its deterrence value with traditional random patrols . 
Small-business patrols would be an especially helpful gesture whenever a small-business person is scheduled to testify against a robbery suspect . 
While no guarantee , an increased police presence might even deter further attacks . 
It might even have saved the life , and business , of Israel Ortiz . 
Mr. Sherman is a professor of criminology at the University of Maryland and president of the Crime Control Institute in Washington , D.C . 
ENFIELD Corp. said in Toronto that it hopes to raise 56 million Canadian dollars ( US$ 47.7 million ) through a rights offering to shareholders . 
Under the offer , shareholders can purchase one Enfield share at C$ 6.27 for each five shares held . 
In Toronto Stock Exchange trading Friday , Enfield closed at C$ 6.75 , down 37.5 cents . 
The holding company said the rights offering should reduce its C$ 171 million debt to `` more manageable levels '' before Dec. 31 and allow it to finance future investments with equity capital . 
At last report , Enfield had about 44.5 million shares outstanding . 
Former U.N. Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick , in a CNN `` Capital Gang '' discussion Oct. 7 of House action on federal catastrophic-illness insurance : 
I think this repeal was kind of a thoughtless action , as a matter of fact ... . 
They will have to revisit this issue , and they 'll have to revisit it before long . 
Diversification pays . 
That 's a fundamental lesson for investors , but its truth was demonstrated once again in the performance of mutual funds during and after the stock market 's Friday-the-13th plunge . 
Stock funds , like the market as a whole , generally dropped more than 2 % in the week through last Thursday , according to figures compiled by Lipper Analytical Services Inc . 
That reflects the huge drop a week ago Friday , last Monday 's rebound and the dips and blips that followed . 
But several other types of funds shielded investors from the worst of the market 's slide . 
Funds that invest internationally were the top-performing stock and fixed-income funds . 
`` More than ever , people should realize they should have a diversified portfolio , '' said Jeremy Duffield , a senior vice president of Vanguard Group . 
`` That means stocks , bonds , money market instruments and real estate . '' 
One week 's performance should n't be the basis for any investment decision . 
But the latest mutual fund performance figures do show what can happen when the going gets rough . 
`` You want to know how a fund did when the market got hammered , '' said Kurt Brouwer , an investment adviser with Brouwer & Janachowski in San Francisco . 
`` It 's like kicking the tires of a car ... . 
What you want to know is when the road 's rough , when there 's snow and ice , how 's this car going to perform ? '' 
General equity funds fell an average of 2.35 % in the week ended Thursday , compared with a 2.32 % slide for the Standard & Poor 's 500-stock index . 
But Lipper Analytical 's figures show that there were a number of ways investors could have cushioned themselves from the stock market 's gyrations . 
Gold-oriented funds , for instance , which invest in companies that mine and process the precious metal , posted an average decline of 1.15 % . 
Flexible portfolio funds , which allocate investments among stocks , bonds and money-market instruments and other investments , declined at about half the rate of stock funds -- an average drop of 1.27 % , according to Lipper . 
Global allocation funds take the asset-allocation concept one step further by investing at least 25 % of their portfolios outside the U.S. . 
This gives them the added benefits of international diversification -- including a foreign-exchange boost during periods , like the past week , when the dollar declines against other major currencies . 
With all that going for them , global flexible portfolio funds declined only 1.07 % in the week through last Thursday . 
But while the merits of diversification shine through when times are tough , there 's also a price to pay : A diversified portfolio always underperforms an undiversified portfolio during those times when the investment in the undiversified portfolio is truly hot . 
And Friday the 13th notwithstanding , stocks have been this year 's hot investment . 
Thus , even including the latest week , the average general stock fund has soared more than 24 % so far this year , the Lipper Analytical figures show . 
By comparison , global asset allocation funds have turned in an average total return of about 19 % , while domestic flexible portfolios are up about 17 % . 
Fixed-income funds have returned 8.2 % , while gold funds , which tend to be volatile , have risen just 4.55 % , on average . 
`` That 's the problem with trying to hedge too much , '' said Mr. Brouwer . 
`` You do n't make any real money . '' 
Over the last 20 years , for example , Mr. Brouwer says , an investor putting $ 5,000 a year in the S&P 500 would have made nearly twice as much than if it were invested in Treasury bills . 
Some equity funds did better than others in the week that began on Friday the 13th . 
The $ 4 million Monetta Fund , for instance , was the seventh top performing fund for the week , with a 2.65 % return . 
Its return so far this year has been a credible 21.71 % . 
The fund 's strategy is to sell when a stock appreciates 30 % over its cost . 
By the time the market plummeted 10 days ago , Monetta was 55 % in cash , said Robert Bacarella , president and portfolio manager . 
Last Monday , he started `` buying the high-quality growth companies that people were throwing away at discount prices . '' 
Among Mr. Bacarella 's picks : Oracle Systems , Reebok International Ltd. and Digital Microwave Corp . 
The fund 's cash position is now about 22 % , which Mr. Bacarella calls `` still bearish . '' 
Among the big stock funds , Dreyfus Fund , with more than $ 2 billion in assets , had a decline of just 1.49 % for the week and a return of 21.42 % for the year . 
Howard Stein , chairman of Dreyfus Corp. , said the fund was about half invested in government bonds on Oct. 13 , and about 10 % in cash . 
`` In a downward market , bonds act better , '' he said . 
`` We still think there 's a lot of unsettlement in this market . 
We believe interest rates will continue to trend lower , and the economy will slow around the world . '' 
Many of the funds that did best in the last week are heavily invested overseas , giving them the benefit of foreign currency translations when the dollar is weak . 
From its high point on Thursday , Oct. 12 , to where it traded late in New York a week later , the dollar fell 3.6 % against the West German mark , 3.4 % against the British pound and 2.1 % against the Japanese yen . 
Three International Cash Portfolios funds , which invest almost exclusively in bonds and money-market instruments overseas , were among the four top-performing funds in the latest week . 
Because the funds ' investments are denominated in foreign currencies , their value expressed in dollars goes up when those currencies rise against the dollar . 
But when the dollar rises against major foreign currencies , as it did for much of this year , the dollar value of these funds declines . 
All three funds posted negative returns for the year to date . 
Of the funds that fared the worst in the post-Oct . 13 week , two are heavily invested in airlines stocks , which led the market slide following problems with financing for the UAL Corp . buy-out plan . 
Reflecting airline takeover activity , however , both the Fidelity Select Air Transportation Portfolio and the National Aviation & Technology fund posted better-than-average returns for the the year to date : 30.09 % for the Fidelity Air Transportation fund and a whopping 47.24 % for National Aviation & Technology . 
The small drop in equity funds in general in the latest week may not necessarily be a good sign , said A. Michael Lipper , president of Lipper Analytical . 
Noting that equity funds are up nearly 60 % from their post-crash low on Dec. 3 , 1987 , he said that what happened last week `` may not be enough of an adjustment . 
There 's either more to come or an extremely long period of dullness . '' 
But investors do n't seem to think so . 
Several big mutual fund groups said last week that cash flows into stock funds were heavier than usual after heavy outflows on the 13th . 
Vanguard Group said it had a more than $ 50 million net inflow into its stock funds last week . 
`` There certainly has n't been a panic reaction , '' said Steven Norwitz , a vice president at T. Rowe Price Associates . 
`` People showed some staying power and , in fact , interest in buying equities . '' 
Source : Lipper Analytical Services Inc . 
\* Not counting dividends 
\*\* With dividends reinvested 
Sources : Lipper Analytical Services Inc. ; Standard & Poor 's Corp . 
Guardian Royal Exchange Assurance PLC , a major British composite insurer , said it is taking a stake in Nationwide Anglia Building Society 's estate agency business as part of a plan to create a range of commercial linkages in the U.K. and Europe . 
Officials declined to disclose the value of the transaction or the exact stake that GRE will hold in Nationwide Anglia Estate Agents . 
But the companies said that Nationwide Anglia Estate Agents will market GRE life insurance , pension and investment products through its more than 1,000 retail outlets in the U.K . 
Besides the marketing agreement , GRE said Nationwide Anglia has agreed to develop life insurance products with the composite insurer . 
Sitting at the bar of the Four Seasons restaurant , architect William McDonough seems oblivious to the glamorous clientele and the elegant setting . 
He is ogling the curtains rippling above the ventilation ducts . 
`` Look how much air is moving around ! '' he says . 
`` The ventilation here is great ! '' 
You may be hearing more about the 38-year-old Mr. McDonough and his preoccupation with clean air . 
After years of relative obscurity , he is starting to attract notice for the ecological as well as the aesthetic quality of his architecture . 
Mr. McDonough believes that the well-being of the planet depends on such stratagems as opening windows to cut indoor air pollution , tacking down carpets instead of using toxic glues , and avoiding mahogany , which comes from endangered rain forests . 
He has put some of his aesthetic ideas into practice with his design of the four-star Quilted Giraffe restaurant -- `` architecturally impeccable , '' Progressive Architecture magazine called it -- and his remodeling of Paul Stuart , the Madison Avenue clothing store . 
He has designed furniture and homes as well as commercial and office space . 
He is now designing a Broadway stage set for a show by the band Kid Creole and the Coconuts . 
What really stirs his muse , though , is aerobic architecture . 
Now the question is : Is Poland ready for it ? 
Mr. McDonough is about to tackle his biggest clean-air challenge yet , the proposed Warsaw Trade Center in Poland , the first such center in Eastern Europe . 
The project has already acquired a certain New York cachet . 
Bloomingdale 's plans to sell a foot-tall chocolate model of the center during the holidays . 
Some of the sales proceeds will go to the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS . 
A cake topped with a replica of the center will be auctioned at an AIDS benefit at Sotheby 's in December . 
If Mr. McDonough 's plans get executed , as much of the Polish center as possible will be made from aluminum , steel and glass recycled from Warsaw 's abundant rubble . 
A 20-story mesh spire will stand atop 50 stories of commercial space . 
Solar-powered batteries will make the spire glow . 
The windows will open . 
The carpets wo n't be glued down , and walls will be coated with nontoxic finishes . 
To the extent that the $ 150 million budget will allow it , Mr. McDonough will rely on solid wood , rather than plywood or particle board , to limit the emission of formaldehyde . 
If Mr. McDonough has his way , the Poles will compensate for the trade center 's emissions of carbon dioxide , a prime suspect in the global atmospheric warming many scientists fear . 
The Poles would plant a 10-square-mile forest somewhere in the country at a cost of $ 150,000 , with the center 's developer footing the bill . 
The news has n't exactly moved others in Mr. McDonough 's profession to become architectural Johnny Appleseeds . 
All architects want to be aware of the ecological consequences of their work , says John Burgee , whose New York firm is designing the redevelopment of Times Square , `` but we ca n't all carry it to that extreme . '' 
Karen Nichols , senior associate at Michael Graves 's architecture firm in Princeton , N.J. , says : `` We 're really at the mercy of what the construction industry can and will do readily . '' 
Mr. McDonough responds : `` I 'm asking people to broaden their agendas . '' 
The son of a Seagram 's executive who was stationed in many countries around the world , Mr. McDonough was born in Tokyo and attended 19 schools in places ranging from Hong Kong to Shaker Heights , Ohio , before entering Dartmouth College . 
He earned a master 's degree in architecture from Yale . 
His interest in the natural environment dates from his youth . 
He and his father still spend time each summer fly-fishing for salmon in Iceland . 
Living in Hong Kong , he says , made him sensitive to the limits on food , power and water supplies . 
At his first school in the U.S. he was thought a little strange for shutting off open water taps and admonishing his schoolmates to take only brief showers . 
He and a Dartmouth roommate established a company that restored three hydroelectric power plants in Vermont . 
At Yale , he designed one of the first solarheated houses to be built in Ireland . 
Mr. McDonough 's first professional project fully to reflect his environmental ardor was his 1986 design for the headquarters of the Environmental Defense Fund in New York . 
The offices took 10,000 square feet of a building with 14-foot ceilings and big , operable windows . 
Since the 1970s energy crisis , some efforts to conserve energy by sealing buildings have had an unintended side effect : high indoor pollution . 
To reduce it at the fund 's building , workers rubbed beeswax instead of polyurethane on the floors in the executive director 's office . 
Jute , rather than a synthetic material , lies under the tacked-down carpets , and the desks are of wood and granite instead of plastic . 
The budget was only $ 400,000 . 
`` Athens with Spartan means , '' Mr. McDonough says . 
The fund 's lawyers work in an Athenian grove of potted trees . 
Economists and administrators sit along a `` boulevard '' with street lamps and ficus trees . 
In offices , triphosphorous bulbs simulate daylight . 
Offices with outside windows have inside windows , too , to let in more real daylight . 
`` We proved a healthy office does n't cost more , '' says Frederic Krupp , executive director of the fund . 
It `` really looks beautiful and is very light , '' says Ann Hornaday , a free-lance writer who has visited the office for lunch meetings . 
But , she says , `` I guess I did n't really notice the trees . 
Maybe they were hidden by all the people . '' 
Neither the Quilted Giraffe nor the Paul Stuart renovation reflects much of Mr. McDonough 's environmental concern . 
The restaurant was conceived as a sparkling , crystalline `` geode . '' 
It makes extensive use of stainless steel , silver and aluminum that sets off black granite table tops and a gray terrazzo with zinc-strip floors . 
To more than replace the wood from two English oaks used for paneling at Paul Stuart , however , Mr. McDonough and friends planted 1,000 acorns around the country . 
The ambitious Warsaw project still awaits approval by city officials . 
Its developer is a Polish American , Sasha Muniak . 
He had worked with Mr. McDonough on an earlier project and recruited him as architect for the trade center . 
The center will provide space for computer hardware and facsimile and other telecommunications equipment , not readily accessible in Poland now , for a growing number of Westerners doing business in Eastern Europe . 
Mr. McDonough thinks of the center as the `` Eiffel Tower of Warsaw '' and `` a symbol of the resurgence of Poland . '' 
If any nation can use environmentally benign architecture , it is Poland . 
Jessica Mathews , vice president of World Resources Institute in Washington , D.C. , says that perhaps a quarter of Poland 's soil is too contaminated for safe farming because of air pollution . 
The pollution is also killing forests and destroying buildings that date back to the Middle Ages . 
The future of the forest remains uncertain . 
Mr. Muniak 's company , Balag Ltd. , has agreed to set aside the money to plant and maintain it , but discussions are still going on over where to place it and how to ensure that it will be maintained . 
After all , Mr. Muniak says , `` in Poland there are n't too many people worried about the environment . 
They 're more worried about bread on the table . 
Pittston Co. 's third-quarter net income plunged 79 % , reflecting the impact of a prolonged and bitter labor strike at its coal operations . 
Net sank to $ 3.1 million , or eight cents a share , including $ 789,000 , or two cents a share , reflecting a tax-loss carry-forward . 
In the year-ago quarter , net totaled $ 14.7 million , or 38 cents a share , including $ 4 million , or 10 cents a share , reflecting a tax-loss carry-forward . 
Revenue slipped 0.7 % to $ 395.3 million from $ 398.3 million . 
Pittston also owns Brink 's Inc. , the security service , and Burlington Air Express , the air-freight concern . 
In addition to expected losses tied to the labor strike , the coal group has spent almost $ 20 million since the strike began for security , the company said . 
As a result , the group 's third-quarter loss widened to $ 9.8 million from the second quarter 's $ 3.6 million . 
Pittston continues to hire replacement workers , the company said . 
Burlington 's operating profit grew to $ 9.2 million from $ 3.8 million a year earlier , Pittston said . 
While `` the tone '' of domestic and international air-freight markets remains sound , seasonal factors are likely to hinder Burlington Air from matching third-quarter results in the fourth quarter , Pittston said . 
Brink 's operating profit was about flat with the year-earlier period , reflecting continued pricing and cost pressures . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday , Pittston closed at $ 18.50 a share , down 12.5 cents . 
Does n't anybody here want to win this mayor 's race ? 
As they stumble and bumble toward election day two weeks from tomorrow , both Democrat David Dinkins and Republican Rudolph Giuliani are in trouble . 
Mr. Dinkins , the Manhattan borough president , can afford more bumbling and stumbling because he holds a comfortable 20-point lead in most of the public-opinion polls . 
But , in the past 10 days , he has taken a series of body blows to his pride and his reputation that could adversely affect his ability to govern this tumultuous city should he become New York 's first black mayor . 
Ordinarily , a clever opponent would find a way to capitalize on the other side 's misfortunes . 
But Mr. Giuliani , a celebrated prosecutor , has had difficulty switching from his crime-busting , finger-pointing mode to a political stance that suggests he might know something about running this big , troubled city . 
And now , at the crucial moment , he 's running out of money . 
This is the nation 's biggest city and , traditionally , its mayor is the nation 's best-known urban politician . 
Democrats hoped that Mr. Dinkins could become a highly visible national leader . 
Republicans figured that in Mr. Giuliani , the nation 's best-known prosecutor , they had a chance for a huge upset in the heart of Democratic territory and that they would pick up a new political star . 
But it has n't worked out that way . 
`` Dinkins is a decent but sloppy guy , '' says David Garth , veteran campaign consultant here who has always worked for Mayor Edward Koch , defeated by Mr. Dinkins in the Sept. 12 Democratic primary . 
`` The alternative -- Giuliani -- is ghastly . '' 
`` I guess we 'll reluctantly go ahead and do it , vote for Dinkins , '' says Richard Wade , a politically active professor who supported Richard Ravitch , an also-ran in the Democratic primary . 
`` There 's nothing on the other side . '' 
`` We 're picking up steam , '' insists Roger Ailes , Mr. Giuliani 's media consultant , whose last big campaign helped put George Bush in the White House . 
He adds : `` It just has n't gotten down to the engine room yet . '' 
But the steam may never reach the engine room . 
For , just as Mr. Giuliani latches on to an issue that has Mr. Dinkins reeling , his campaign desperately needs cash to keep Mr. Ailes 's commercials on the air beyond Wednesday or Thursday . 
To help out this week , the White House is dispatching chief of staff John Sununu and three Cabinet members -- HUD 's Jack Kemp , Transportation 's Samuel Skinner and Treasury 's Nicholas Brady , according to Peter Powers , the Giuliani campaign manager . 
For Republicans who began this campaign with such high hopes , all of this is deeply frustrating . 
Historically , New York is almost always in trouble . 
But the trouble it faces now under Democratic rule seems bigger and more daunting than anything it has faced in the past . 
This year , the city faces a budget deficit that could become even bigger next year . 
And hardly surprising , many residents trying to cope with the city 's other problems are constantly on edge , one ethnic group scrapping with another . 
`` People were n't so happy in the 1930s , '' says Thomas Lessner , another local professor and the biographer of the legendary Fiorello LaGuardia , the city 's fusion mayor who built a coalition Mr. Giuliani hopes to emulate . 
`` But , at least , back then they did n't generally direct their anger at each other . '' 
The 62-year-old Mr. Dinkins , an ex-Marine , has served as the city clerk and as Manhattan borough president , a job with limited executive responsibilities 
( `` I defy you to come up with one major accomplishment of David Dinkins , '' says Mr. Giuliani . ) 
He defeated the contentious Mr. Koch in the Democratic primary partly because he seemed to offer hope he could heal the city 's racial and ethnic wounds . 
His general-election campaign is almost Reagan-like , all muted pictures and comforting words . 
His theme is unity , decency , humanity , bringing New York together again . 
Both candidates are negotiating about holding debates , but Mr. Dinkins is widely seen as the major obstacle for scheduling them . 
The 45-year-old Mr. Giuliani has run a negative campaign to pick up votes leaning to Mr. Dinkins . 
`` He 's got to get Dinkins 's negatives up , '' says Lee Miringoff , director of the Marist College Institute of Public Opinion . 
`` But our polls show voters do n't like the attack stuff . 
Why , even 20 % of the Republican vote is going to Dinkins . '' 
`` It 's assault-weapons politics , '' says John Siegal , Mr. Dinkins 's issues director , insisting there is a strong racist undertone to the Giuliani effort . 
For the Giuliani forces , it 's a conundrum . 
On the one hand , Mr. Giuliani wants to cut into Mr. Dinkins 's credibility . 
On the other , he seeks to convince voters he 's the new Fiorello LaGuardia -- affable , good-natured and ready to lead New York out of the mess it 's in . 
It has n't helped that he 's waffled on abortion and gay rights , sought the support of both the Liberal and Conservative parties ( he won the Liberal endorsement ) and that he turned to comedian Jackie Mason for help with Jewish voters . 
Mr. Mason left the campaign after telling reporters Mr. Dinkins is `` a fancy'shvartzer ' with a moustache . '' 
Shvartzer is a derogatory Yiddish word for a black person . 
Mr. Dinkins concedes nothing in his ability to stumble and bumble . 
He can match Jackie Mason with his own Robert `` Sonny '' Carson , an angry street organizer who was convicted of kidnapping in 1974 . 
The Dinkins campaign paid Mr. Carson close to $ 10,000 to get out the vote on primary-election day . 
Paper work on how it was spent is incomplete . 
Mr. Carson has been charged with being anti-Semitic . 
Asked about that the other day , he replied , `` Anti-Semitic ? 
I 'm anti-white . '' 
More troubling for Mr. Dinkins is his record in personal accounting . 
It began in 1973 , when he was being considered for deputy mayor , and a routine check unearthed the extraordinary fact that he had n't paid his income tax for the previous four years . 
`` I was always going to do it tomorrow , '' he explained at the time . 
And now he 's busily trying to explain an arrangement in which he sold stock in Inner City Broadcasting Co. , headed by his old friend and patron , Percy Sutton , to his son , David Dinkins Jr. , for $ 58,000 . 
He had valued the shares at more than $ 1 million two years earlier . 
He says he sold the stock to avoid conflict-of-interest problems in his role as a voting member of the city 's Board of Estimate . 
He says his son has n't paid for the shares . 
`` It looks like serious tax evasion , '' says Mr. Ailes , the Giuliani media consultant . 
`` It follows the same pattern as his tax returns . 
He waits to talk about it until after he gets caught . '' 
`` He simply has n't explained why something worth a million dollars ended up worth $ 58,000 two years later , '' says Mr. Powers , the Giuliani campaign manager . 
`` It 's ludicrous for him to suggest it 's the difference between the'breakup ' value of the shares and their market value . '' 
So far though , no one -- not even former U.S. attorney Giuliani -- has been able to pinpoint just what law Mr. Dinkins has broken or just what tax he has evaded . 
`` The crime goes to character , '' says Ron Maiorana , a consultant to the Giuliani campaign . 
`` It 's serious stuff . 
He evades and ducks . 
He 's had a history of deception and this is the latest chapter . '' 
`` It makes people think , maybe this guy is n't so squeaky clean after all , '' says Mr. Garth , Mayor Koch 's media consultant . 
`` The result may turn out to be a lot closer than people think . 
The long-running scandal surrounding the 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano was reignited by the arrest last week of Rome businessman Flavio Carboni on fraud charges . 
Rome magistrates accuse Mr. Carboni and several other people of trying to extort 1.2 billion lire ( $ 880,000 ) from the Vatican in return for documents contained in the briefcase of Roberto Calvi , the Ambrosiano chairman found hanged under London 's Blackfriar 's Bridge shortly before the bank 's collapse . 
Banco Ambrosiano , which was Italy 's largest private-sector bank , collapsed in 1982 with $ 1.3 billion of debts . 
Most of the money was lent to a series of shell companies in Panama and Luxembourg that were owned , directly or indirectly , by the Vatican bank . 
The Vatican , which denies any wrongdoing , paid $ 250 million to the Milan bank 's creditors as a `` goodwill gesture '' in 1985 . 
Italian news reports said Mr. Carboni and a colleague obtained 1.2 billion lire in checks from a Vatican official , Pavel Hnilica . 
Italian papers speculated the briefcase contained papers either exonerating the Vatican bank from blame in the scandal , or showing that the bank , known as the Istituto per le Opere di Religione , channeled funds to East bloc groups such as Solidarity in Poland . 
Neither Mr. Hnilica , Mr. Carboni nor Vatican officials could be reached for comment over the weekend . 
This business trust company said its board elected Kieran E. Burke , a consultant to Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc. , as chief executive officer , a new post , and as president . 
Mr. Burke succeeds Richard D. Manley , who will remain as a consultant to the company . 
Both men were unavailable to comment . 
The company also named Michael E. Gellert , a director and a major shareholder , to fill the vacant seat of chairman . 
Britain 's Serious Fraud Office said it will investigate the circumstances surrounding alleged phantom contracts at Ferranti International Signal PLC 's International Signal & Control unit . 
The investigation , which will be coordinated with one already under way in the U.S. , follows the discovery of what Ferranti has called a `` serious '' fraud involving its U.S. subsidiary . 
International Signal & Control , Lancaster , Pa. , a defense-equipment manufacturer , was bought by Ferranti in 1987 for # 420 million ( $ 670.3 million ) . 
Ferranti has said that it would be forced to write off # 185 million against the phantom contracts , reducing its net asset value by more than half . 
The Serious Fraud Office , a division of London 's Metropolitan Police responsible for investigating financial crimes , said its work would take in `` allegations of fraud prior to , surrounding and subsequent to the merger . '' 
Ferranti said that it welcomes the investigation and that it will `` cooperate fully . '' 
Derek Alun-Jones , Ferranti 's chairman , has said he hoped to pursue legal action against those responsible . 
The British defense electronics group has said it will sell # 100 million in assets and may seek a merger to strengthen itself in the wake of its troubles . 
Chicago businessmen Bertram M. Lee and Peter Bynoe signed a new agreement to purchase the Denver Nuggets basketball team , but not as principal owners . 
On Saturday , the partners said the team would be purchased for $ 54 million by a new group including Comsat Video Enterprises Inc. , a unit of Communications Satellite Corp. based here . 
Comsat Video will pay $ 17 million for a 62.5 % interest , with Messrs. Lee and Bynoe putting up $ 8 million for a 37.5 % stake in the team . 
Under terms of the sale , Nuggets owner Sidney Shlenker could receive up to $ 11 million in additional payments from the franchise 's future earnings . 
Messrs. Lee and Bynoe last July announced a deal that would have made them the first black principal owners of a major professional sports franchise . 
But the deal fell apart last week for lack of financing . 
Comsat Video is headed by Robert Wussler , who resigned his No. 2 executive post with Turner Broadcasting System Inc. just two weeks ago to take the Comsat position . 
Comsat Video , which distributes pay-per-view programs to hotel rooms , plans to add Nuggets games to their offerings , as Mr. Turner did successfully with his Atlanta Hawks and Braves sports teams . 
Messrs. Lee and Bynoe will manage the Nuggets ' day-today affairs . 
Royal Business Group Inc. said it filed suit in federal court here charging Realist Inc. and its directors with violating federal securities laws `` by engaging in a scheme to prevent '' Royal from acquiring Realist . 
Royal , which makes and distributes business forms , owns an 8 % stake in Realist . 
Royal contends that Realist failed to disclose material information , including Realist 's negotiations to acquire Ammann Laser Technik AG , to stockholders prior to Realist 's June 6 annual meeting . 
Royal 's suit contends that the Ammann acquisition was `` designed to entrench management and thwart Royal 's offer . '' 
Royal withdrew its offer to buy Realist , a maker of optical and electronic products based in Menomonee Falls , Wis. , for $ 14.06 a share in July after Realist disclosed the Ammann purchase . 
The suit seeks `` in excess of $ 350,000 in damages . '' 
A Realist official said the company had n't yet received the full complaint and would n't have a response until it had an opportunity to review it . 
Winnebago Industries Inc. , battered by a deepening slowdown in recreational vehicle industry sales , reported a widened fourth-quarter loss and slashed its dividend in half . 
The Forest City , Iowa , maker of motor homes said it had a loss of $ 11.3 million , or 46 cents a share , in the quarter ended Aug. 26 . 
A year earlier , the company had a deficit of $ 1.5 million , or six cents a share . 
The cut in the dividend to 10 cents a share semiannually , from 20 cents , `` would indicate to me they do n't see the problems being fixed real quick , '' said Frank Rolfes , an analyst at Dain Bosworth Inc. in Minneapolis . 
Indeed , Winnebago said it started `` several promotional programs '' to spur retail sales in the fall and winter . 
The year was already shaping up as a difficult one for the recreational vehicle industry , which makes products such as motor homes , travel trailers , folding campers and van conversions . 
With the exception of van conversions , the industry has seen a decline from 1988 's robust sales . 
But the rate of the decline snowballed in August , with unit sales to dealers for the month down 10.5 % from a year earlier , according to the Recreation Vehicle Industry Association . 
At Winnebago , sales for the quarter fell 6 % to $ 89.5 million from $ 95.4 million a year earlier . 
The company attributed the decline to consumers ' concern over interest rates and gas prices -- two key expenses for RV buyers . 
`` It 's a large-ticket discretionary purchase , '' said Robert Curran , who follows the industry for Merrill Lynch & Co . 
`` So when there 's talk and concern about the economy , it 's not unreasonable for a portion of the buying public to defer purchases . '' 
Mr. Curran expects industry RV sales for all of 1989 to fall about 5 % from 1988 , when sales of 427,300 units were the highest since 1978 . 
And he said the weakness could continue in the first half of next year . 
But he said the industry has `` a good decade ahead , '' particularly if aging baby boomers fulfill the industry 's dreams by buying RVs . 
Winnebago was hit especially hard in the latest downturn because unit sales in its bread-and-butter motor home business tumbled 25 % industrywide in August , and 10.4 % in the first eight months of the year . 
The company said it also suffered in the quarter from incentive programs , losses from discontinuing a motor home line and costs of developing a new commercial vehicle , among other things . 
The news sent Winnebago stock falling 62.5 cents , to $ 5.25 , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading - a 52-week low . 
The dividend cut will prove most costly for John K. Hanson , Winnebago 's founder and chairman . 
Based on his control of about 45 % of Winnebago 's 24.7 million shares , his annual dividend income would be cut to about $ 2.2 million from $ 4.4 million . 
For the year , Winnebago had a loss of $ 4.7 million , or 19 cents a share , following profit of $ 2.7 million , or 11 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales rose 2 % to $ 437.5 million from $ 430.3 million . 
Bullish bond market sentiment is on the rise again . 
As the government prepares to release the next batch of economic reports , the consensus among economists and money managers is that the news will be negative . 
And that , they say , will be good for bonds . 
`` Recent data have indicated somewhat weaker economic activity , '' said Elliott Platt , director of economic research at Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette Securities . 
Mr. Platt is advising clients that `` the near-term direction of bond prices is likely to remain upward . '' 
Analysts insist that even without help from a shaky stock market , which provided a temporary boost for bonds during the Oct. 13 stock market plunge , bond prices will start to climb on the prospects that the Federal Reserve will allow interest rates to move lower in the coming weeks . 
That would be comforting to fixed-income investors , many of whom were badly burned in the third quarter by incorrectly assuming that the Fed would ease . 
Investors rushed to buy bonds during the summer as prices soared on speculation that interest rates would continue to fall . 
But when it became clear that rates had stabilized and that the Fed 's credit-easing policy was on hold , bond yields jumped and prices tumbled . 
Long-term bonds have performed erratically this year . 
For example , a group of long-term Treasury bonds tracked by Merrill Lynch & Co. produced a total return of 1 % in the first quarter , 12.45 % in the second quarter and -0.06 % in the third quarter . 
Total return is price changes plus interest income . 
Now some investment analysts insist that the economic climate has turned cold and gloomy , and they are urging clients to buy bonds before the rally begins . 
Among other things , economists note that consumer spending is slowing , corporate profit margins are being squeezed , business confidence is slipping and construction and manufacturing industries are depressed . 
At the same time , last week 's consumer price index showed that inflation is moderating . 
Add it all up and it means `` that the Fed has a little leeway to ease its credit policy stance without the risk of rekindling inflation , '' said Norman Robertson , chief economist at Mellon Bank Corp. , Pittsburgh . 
`` I think we will see a federal funds rate of close to 8 1\/2 % in the next two weeks and 8 % by year end . '' 
The federal funds rate , which banks charge each other on overnight loans , is considered an early signal of changes in the Fed 's credit policy . 
Economists generally agree that the rate was lowered by the Fed from around 9 % , where it had been since July , to about 8 3\/4 % in early October on the heels of a weak employment report . 
Although the rate briefly drifted even lower following the stock market sell-off that occurred Oct. 13 , it ended Friday at about 8 11\/16 % . 
James Kochan , chief fixed-income strategist at Merrill Lynch , is touting shorter-term securities , which he says should benefit more quickly than longer-term bonds as interest rates fall . 
`` Given our forecast for lower rates , purchases made now should prove quite rewarding before year end , '' he said . 
Mr. Kochan also likes long-term , investment-grade corporate bonds and long-term Treasurys . 
He says these bonds should appreciate in value as some investors , reacting to the recent turmoil in the stock and high-yield junk bond markets , seek safer securities . 
`` If the { Tennessee Valley Authority } sale is any guide , there appears to be good demand for top-quality , long-term paper from both domestic and overseas accounts , '' he said . 
TVA , in its first public debt offering in 15 years , sold $ 4 billion of long-term and intermediate-term securities last week . 
Strong investor demand prompted the utility to boost the size of the issue from $ 3 billion . 
TVA , which operates one of the nation 's largest electric power systems , is a corporation owned by the federal government . 
But persuading investors to buy bonds may be especially tough this week , when the U.S. government will auction more than $ 30 billion of new securities . 
Today , the Treasury Department will sell $ 15.6 billion of three-month and six-month bills at the regular weekly auction . 
Tomorrow , the Treasury will sell $ 10 billion of two-year notes . 
Resolution Funding Corp. , known as Refcorp , a division of a new government agency created to bail out the nation 's troubled savings and loan associations , will hold its first bond auction Wednesday , when it will sell $ 4.5 billion of 30-year bonds . 
All of this comes ahead of the government 's big quarterly refunding of the federal debt , which takes place sometime in November . 
So far , investors have n't shown much appetite for Refcorp 's initial bond offering . 
Roger Early , a portfolio manager at Federated Investors Corp. , said that yields on the so-called bailout bonds are n't high enough to attract his attention . 
`` Why should I bother with something that 's an unknown for a very small pickup in yield ? '' he said . 
`` I 'm not going to jump on them the first day they come out . '' 
He seems to be typical of many professional money managers . 
When the size of the Refcorp offering was announced last week and when-issued trading activity began , the bailout bonds were yielding about 1\/20 percentage point more than the Treasury 's benchmark 30-year bond . 
On Friday , the yield was quoted at about 1\/4 percentage point higher than the benchmark bond , an indication of weak demand . 
Some economists believe that yields on all Treasury securities may rise this week as the market struggles to absorb the new supply . 
But once the new securities are digested , they expect investors to focus on the weak economic data . 
`` The supply is not a constraint to the market , '' said Samuel Kahan , chief financial economist at Kleinwort Benson Government Securities Inc . 
`` If one thinks that rates are going down , you do n't care how much supply is coming . '' 
Friday 's Market Activity 
Most bond prices fell on concerns about this week 's new supply and disappointment that stock prices did n't stage a sharp decline . 
Junk bond prices moved higher , however . 
In early trading , Treasury bonds were higher on expectations that a surge in buying among Japanese investors would continue . 
Also providing support to Treasurys was hope that the stock market might see declines because of the expiration of some stock-index futures and options on indexes and individual stocks . 
Those hopes were dashed when the stock market put in a relatively quiet performance . 
Treasury bonds ended with losses of as much as 1\/4 point , or about $ 2.50 for each $ 1,000 face amount . 
The benchmark 30-year bond , which traded as high as 102 1\/4 during the day , ended at 101 17\/32 . 
The yield on the benchmark bond rose slightly to 7.98 % from 7.96 % . 
In the corporate bond market , traders said the new-issue market for junk bonds is likely to pick up following Chicago & North Western Acquisition Corp. 's $ 475 million junk bond offering Friday . 
Today , for example , underwriters at Morgan Stanley & Co. said they expect to price a $ 150 million , 12-year senior subordinated debenture offering by Imo Industries Inc . 
Traders expect the issue to be priced to yield 12 % . 
Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. said that a $ 150 million senior subordinated discount debenture issue by R.P. Scherer Drugs is expected by the end of the month . 
However , despite the big new-issue calendar , many junk bond investors and analysts are skeptical the deals will get done . 
`` There are about a dozen more deals coming , '' said Michael McNamara , director of fixed-income research at Kemper Financial Services Inc . 
`` If they had this much trouble with Chicago & North Western , they are going to have an awful time with the rest . '' 
Last week , underwriters were forced to postpone three junk bond deals because of recent weakness in the market . 
And pressure by big investors forced Donaldson Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. to sweeten Chicago & North Western 's $ 475 million junk bond offering . 
After hours of negotiating that stretched late into Thursday night , underwriters priced the 12-year issue of resettable senior subordinated debentures at par to yield 14.75 % , higher than the 14.5 % that had been expected . 
The coupon on the issue will be reset in one year at a rate that will give the issue a market value of 101 . 
However , the maximum coupon rate on the issue when it is reset is 15.50 % . 
Debenture holders also will receive the equivalent of 10 % of the common stock in Chicago & North Western 's parent company . 
`` The coupon was raised to induce some of the big players on the fence to come in , '' said a spokesman for Donaldson . 
`` We put a price on the deal that the market required to get it done . '' 
The spokesman said the issue was sold out and met with strong interest abroad , particularly from Japanese investors . 
In the secondary , or resale , market , junk bonds closed 1\/2 point higher , while investment-grade corporate bonds fell 1\/8 to 1\/4 point . 
Sotheby 's Inc. 's gamble in the art-dealing business appears to have paid off . 
The New York arm of the London-based auction house auctioned off the estate of John T. Dorrance Jr. , the Campbell 's Soup Co. heir , for $ 131 million last week , a record for a single-owner art collection . 
That total was below the $ 140 million the auction house estimated the collection might sell for , but was enough to ensure that an unprecedented financial arrangement Sotheby 's had made with the Dorrance family proved profitable to the auction house . 
Sotheby 's provided the Dorrance family a guarantee of at least $ 100 million , and as much as $ 120 million , to obtain the collection , people familiar with the transaction said , thus taking a greater than usual financial interest in the property to be sold . 
The Dorrance estate , auctioned off in a series of sales held over four days , included porcelains , furniture and paintings . 
An Henri Matisse , auctioned last Wednesday , fetched $ 12.4 million , a world record for the artist . 
In addition , a handful of paintings from the Dorrance collection remain to be sold at Sotheby 's annual old masters paintings auction in January . 
The Better Business Bureau of San Diego and the state Attorney General 's office entered into a settlement stemming from an investigation of bureau-sponsored business directories published by an outside firm , Better Book Inc . 
The settlement stems from charges that Better Book , now defunct , made misrepresentations in selling advertising for the directories and memberships in the bureau from 1984 to 1986 . 
Without admitting any guilt , the bureau agreed to several conditions if it again contracts with an outside firm to publish its directories . 
The conditions include not misrepresenting how many directories will be distributed , and agreeing to make refunds to directory advertisers if any misrepresentations are involved in the sale . 
The Attorney General 's investigation was sparked by lawsuits and charges by angry California businesspeople that they were swindled in a bureau-sponsored directory project contracted by Better Book . 
The uproar led to the closing of the Los Angeles Better Business Bureau in late 1987 . 
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. said it obtained `` firm '' financing commitments from three major banks in regard to its offer for 50.3 % of LIN Broadcasting Corp . 
Morgan Guaranty Trust , Toronto-Dominion Bank and Provident National Bank , an affiliate of PNC Financial Corp. , jointly committed $ 1.2 billion of financing , subject to certain conditions , McCaw said . 
Further , McCaw said the banks expressed confidence that the balance of the $ 4.5 billion bank facility will be committed within the next several weeks by a syndicate of foreign and domestic banks . 
Morgan , Toronto-Dominion and Provident are leading that syndicate . 
McCaw is offering to buy 22 million shares of LIN for $ 125 each in cash , which would result in McCaw owning 50.3 % of the cellular-phone and broadcasting concern . 
The offer is in limbo , however , because LIN has agreed to merge its cellular-phone businesses with BellSouth Corp . 
In national over-the-counter trading Friday , LIN shares rose 62.5 cents to close at $ 110.625 . 
Beijing lawmakers have called for jails to be built to house prostitutes and for severe punishment , including the death sentence , for anyone who induces or coerces women into prostitution . 
The official Xinhua News Agency said the municipal government was discussing a draft bill to give the capital its first anti-prostitution statutes . 
It quoted Liu Changyi , deputy director of the Beijing Public Security Bureau , as saying that there were many more people involved in prostitution now than in 1985 , when there were about 100 cases . 
Foreigners involved in prostitution will be punished according to the law , and those with sexually transmitted diseases will be expelled from the country , according to the regulations . 
The Communists nearly succeeded in eliminating prostitution after taking over in 1949 , but the practice has returned in recent years with the country 's increased exposure to the outside world . 
Japan agreed to enforce a decision by an international wildlife conference to ban all trade in ivory , a spokesman for the Ministry of International Trade and Industry said . 
Earlier , Japan had said it might file a reservation against the ivory ban decided by ballot at the 103-nation United Nations Conference on International Trade in Endangered Species in Switzerland last week . 
The Japanese use 40 % of the world 's ivory . 
Italy should close the Leaning Tower of Pisa because it 's a danger to tourists , government-appointed experts said . 
`` In some places the stonework is so damaged it shows signs of breaking off , '' scientists and technicians said in a report to Public Works Minister Giovanni Prandini . 
Each year , nearly a million people pay about $ 3 to make the spiral climb up 294 steps to the top of the 800-year-old marble tower . 
East Germany pledged to reduce alcohol consumption by boosting production of soft drinks and fruit juices . 
Trade and Supply Minister Gerhard Briksa said in a letter published in the youth daily Junge Welt that the rise in alcohol consumption in East Germany had been halted ; but to reduce it further , he said , production and supply of other beverages , including fruit juices , should be stepped up . 
He added that shops will have to continue reducing their stocks of liquor and avoid displaying them too prominently in the window . 
Hong Kong has built a detention center for illegal immigrants from China because China has refused for the past two weeks to accept them back . 
The center , close to Hong Kong 's border with China , will be ready today and will be able to house 1,000 inmates , Police Deputy Director Peter Wong said . 
The dispute started when China , angry that Hong Kong had allowed dissident swimmer Yang Yang to flee to the U.S. , halted the usual daily transfer of illegal immigrants caught in this British colony , which reverts to Beijing 's control in 1997 . 
Sweating under the glare of newly installed television lights , British members of Parliament demanded a halt to the experimental televising of debates . 
A group of senior Conservative legislators , complaining the House of Commons was like a sauna , demanded that the experiment be stopped unless the intensity of the lights is reduced . 
One Conservative MP , David Wilshire , said : `` I should have a wonderful suntan by Christmas . '' 
Debates are due to be broadcast nationally starting Nov. 21 in a six-month experiment . 
A majority of Japanese banks are said to be wary of making new loans to Mexico under the Brady plan because they 're uncertain the Mexican economy will remain stable . 
Instead , many small and medium-sized banks , and some larger ones , are likely to take one of the other two options open to them under the plan , Japanese banking officials said . 
The plan , proposed by U.S. Secretary of State Nicholas Brady , calls for banks either to make new loans or to reduce the principle on existing loans or to cut the interest rate on those existing loans . 
The officials said that most Japanese banks prefer the losses they 'd suffer in either of the latter options to the risk of new lending . 
But an official at a long-term credit bank explained that since some larger banks have already taken loss provisions for loans to other Third World nations , further write-offs could be viewed as intolerable . 
`` They ca n't take the hit '' to their earnings , he said . 
As a result , the official said , they may be forced into a no-win situation in which they make risky loans that they could have to write off later . 
A poll in male-dominated South Korea put Margaret Thatcher first on a list of most-respected foreign leaders . 
The British prime minister was the only woman singled out by respondents , who put Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev in second place ... . 
The Soviet newspaper Trud reported that Mickey Mouse will appear in a Russian-language comic book to be issued four times a year by Soviet publisher Fizkultura i Sport and Denmark 's Gutenberghus Group . 
The comic book will cost about $ 2 . 
Ekco Group Inc. , Nashua , N.H. , expects to report that net income in the third quarter , ended Oct. 1 , fell 50 % to 60 % from $ 2.1 million , or 11 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Robert Stein , president and chief executive officer , attributed the expected decline partly to the effects of a two-week strike last month at the company 's Masillon , Ohio , bakeware facility . 
Softer-than-expected orders in early September also played a role , he said in an interview . 
But Mr. Stein said he is `` reasonably confident '' that earnings for the full year will exceed the $ 3.1 million , or 17 cents a share , in 1988 . 
That would require fourth-quarter net of more than about 22 cents to 24 cents a share , assuming that Mr. Stein 's third-quarter estimate proves accurate . 
In the year-earlier fourth quarter , the company had profit of $ 2.7 million , or 15 cents a share . 
Third-quarter revenue is expected to be $ 40 million to $ 45 million , up from $ 38.2 million a year earlier , according to Neil Gordon , treasurer . 
The year-earlier periods do n't reflect results of the company 's Woodstream Corp. unit , acquired last January , but include some Canadian operations that were sold at the end of 1988 . 
August through October traditionally is the busiest season for the bakeware business , as many retailers use the goods as autumn promotional items . 
Mr. Stein said some retailers -- perhaps anxious about minimizing inventories -- appear to have held back on orders in September but have been ordering more heavily in October . 
Mr. Stein said Woodstream is `` marginally profitable '' but has n't performed as well as expected . 
Woodstream 's Victor-brand mousetraps and other pest-control products are `` doing very well , '' and its plastic storage-case products `` are poised for growth , '' he said . 
But the unit 's third segment , wildlife traps , is suffering from a `` depressed market , '' and Ekco is seeking to sell that segment , he said . 
Mr. Stein said he expects profit to be higher in 1990 than in 1989 , reflecting a number of measures taken since the acquisition of Ekco Housewares in late 1987 . 
( Prior to acquiring the housewares business , the company was known as Centronics Corp. ; Centronics had been a maker of computer printers , but Mr. Stein and other officers decided to sell that business after Japanese competitors grabbed a dominant share of the market . ) 
Mr. Stein said tighter operating controls have enabled Ekco to reduce inventory levels 25 % to 30 % ; improve on-time delivery of orders to about 95 % from around 70 % ; and to lower the number of labor hours required to produce a unit . 
By moving the design of new products in-house -- instead of contracting out the work -- the company also has been able to come up with designs that can be manufactured more efficiently , he said . 
In addition to those measures , the company spent heavily earlier this year to install displays at its customers ' retail outlets -- a strategy that Mr. Stein said has helped bolster awareness of the company 's brands . 
Ekco 's housewares operation makes kitchen tools and gadgets , as well as bakeware , at factories in the U.S. and Canada . 
The main issue in the strike at the Ohio facility was health-care benefits , Mr. Stein said . 
The strike ended Oct . 
Ekco continues to seek further acquisitions in the consumer-products industry , Mr. Stein said . 
He indicated that Ekco may be interested in acquiring another company with revenue in the range of $ 75 million to $ 100 million , partly because mass merchandisers increasingly want to rely on larger , and fewer , suppliers . 
After several years of booming business with China , foreign traders are bracing for the biggest slump in a decade . 
The imposition of austerity measures , starting last October , already had begun to pinch when the massacre in Tiananmen Square on June 4 and subsequent events tugged the belt far tighter . 
Foreign lending has been virtually suspended since then , choking liquidity and hobbling many projects . 
And Beijing has pulled back on domestic loans and subsidies , leaving many domestic buyers and export-oriented plants strapped for cash . 
Givaudan Far East Ltd. , a Swiss concern that sells chemicals to shampoo and soap factories in China , typifies the problems . 
Last year 's retrenchment dried up the working capital of Chinese factories . 
The company 's sales flattened during 1989 's first half . 
The June killings magnified the problems . 
In Canton , Givaudan 's representative office received no orders in June . 
At first it attributed the slump to temporary business disruptions , but when no orders were logged in August and September , manager Donald Lai became convinced that business would be bad for many months . 
`` Things have grown worse since June 4 , '' Mr. Lai says . 
He predicts that sales will drop between 30 % and 40 % from last year 's $ 3 million . 
The consumer-products and light-industrial sectors are bearing the brunt of China 's austerity measures , and foreign companies such as Givaudan that deal with those industries are being hit the hardest . 
But in general , all foreign-trading companies are feeling the pinch . 
`` The import pie will shrink , '' says John Kamm , first vice president of the American Chamber of Commerce in Hong Kong and a China trade specialist . 
`` On the down side , sales could fall as much as 90 % for some companies ; on the upper side , sales will be flat . '' 
China 's foreign trade has gone in cycles during the past decade . 
The last time that traders experienced a trough was during 1985-86 , when Beijing imposed tough measures to curb imports and conserve foreign exchange . 
The current trough is expected to be much deeper , because Beijing has cut off domestic funds from factories for the first time to slow inflation . 
In addition , the suspension of loans and export credits from foreign governments and institutions following the June killings have been a big setback . 
`` The freeze on new lending is dealing the single biggest blow to trading , '' says Raymond Wong , China manager for Mannesmann AG , a West German machinery-trading company . 
Import growth from the year-earlier months slowed to 16 % in July and 7.1 % in August , compared with an average growth rate of 26 % in the first half . 
In the first eight months of 1989 , imports grew 21 % , to $ 38.32 billion , down slightly from a growth rate of 23 % a year earlier . 
The picture for China 's exports is just as bleak , mainly because of the domestic credit squeeze . 
Exports in the first eight months grew only 9 % , to $ 31.48 billion , compared with a growth rate of 25 % a year earlier , according to Chinese customs figures . 
The threat to China 's balance of payments is further aggravated by the plunge in its foreign-exchange reserves , excluding gold holdings . 
The reserves dropped for the first time in recent years , to $ 14 billion in June from $ 19 billion in April . 
The trend has prompted Beijing to intensify efforts to curb imports . 
In recent weeks , China 's leaders have recentralized trading in wool and scores of chemical products and commodities . 
The Ministry of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade set up a special bureau last month to monitor the issue of import and export licenses . 
Beijing 's periodic clampdowns on imports have taught many trading companies that the best way to get through the drought is by helping China export . 
For example , Nissho Iwai Corp. , one of the biggest Japanese trading houses , now buys almost twice as many goods from China as it sells to that country . 
Three years ago , the ratio was reversed . 
But the strategy is n't helping much this time . 
`` Both sectors of imports and exports look just as bad , '' says Masahiko Kitamura , general manager of Nissho Iwai 's Canton office . 
He expects the company 's trading business to drop as much as 40 % this year . 
For a short time after June 4 , it appeared that the trade picture would remain fairly bright . 
Many foreign trading offices in Hong Kong were swamped with telexes and telephone calls from Chinese trade officials urging them not to sever ties . 
Even the Bank of China , which normally took weeks to process letters of credit , was settling the letters at record speed to dispel rumors about the bank 's financial health . 
But when foreign traders tried to do business , they discovered that the eagerness of Chinese trade officials was just a smokescreen . 
The suspension of foreign loans has weakened the buying power of China 's national trading companies , which are among the country 's biggest importers . 
Business is n't any better on the provincial or municipal level , foreign traders say . 
Shanghai Investment & Trust Co. , known as Sitco , is the city 's main financier for trading business . 
Sitco had customarily tapped the Japanese bond market for funds , but it ca n't do that any longer . 
Foreign traders say the company is strapped for cash . 
`` It has difficulties paying its foreign debts , '' says a Hong Kong executive who is familiar with Sitco 's business . 
`` How can it make available funds for purchases ? '' 
Foreign traders also say many of China 's big infrastructural projects have been canceled or postponed because of the squeeze on domestic and foreign credit . 
Albert Lee , a veteran trader who specializes in machinery sales , estimates that as many as 70 % of projects that had obtained approval to proceed have been canceled in recent months . 
`` There are virtually no new projects , and that means no new business for us , '' he says . 
Even when new lending resumes , foreign exchange would still be tight because Beijing will likely try to rein in foreign borrowing , which has grown between 30 % and 40 % in the past few years . 
And foreign creditors are likely to be more cautious about extending new loans because China is nearing a peak repayment period as many loans start falling due in the next two to five years . 
Another reason for the intensity of the trade problems is that Beijing has extended the current clampdown on imports beyond the usual target of consumer products to include steel , chemical fertilizers and plastics . 
These have been among the country 's leading imports , particularly last year when there were shortages that led many traders to buy heavily and pay dearly . 
But the shortages also spawned rampant speculation and spiraling prices . 
To stem speculation , Beijing imposed ceiling prices that went into effect earlier this year . 
Traders who had bought the goods at prices above the ceiling do n't want to take a loss on resales and are holding onto their stock . 
The resulting stockpiling has depressed the market . 
But Beijing ca n't cut back on such essential imports as raw materials for too long without hampering the country 's export business . 
Mr. Kamm , the China trade expert , estimates that as much as 50 % of Guangdong 's exports is made up of processed imported raw materials . 
Oil Spill Case Shows Liability Fund Flaws 
AN UNRESOLVED two-year-old dispute stemming from an Alaskan oil spill has helped spur a drive for tougher federal laws to protect victims of such accidents . 
The class-action suit highlights shortcomings of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Liability Fund , which gets its money from oil companies using the pipeline and compensates those harmed by oil spills . 
On July 2 , 1987 , the tanker S.S. Glacier Bay struck a rock and spilled almost 150,000 gallons of oil into the Cook Inlet . 
Commercial fishermen and fish processors filed suit in federal court in a claim that has ballooned to more than $ 104.8 million . 
Defendants include British Petroleum America ; Trinidad Corp. , the shipper ; and the pipeline liability fund . 
The fund was created by the Trans-Alaska Pipeline Act , which provides that the owner or operator of a vessel involved in an oil spill must pay the first $ 14 million in damages . 
The fund is required to pay claims up to an additional $ 86 million . 
The fund 's purpose is to provide quick and adequate relief . 
But the Glacier Bay case , the fund 's first test , shows how easily the fund can be undermined . 
Trinidad Corp. is contesting liability . 
It claims the Coast Guard failed to chart the rock and refuses to pay damages . 
That means the fund is n't obligated to pay anything , at least so far . 
The Oil Pollution Act , scheduled to come up for a vote in Congress this fall , would provide that if claimants are n't paid within 90 days of a spill , the liability fund would compensate them and seek reimbursement from the owner or operator of the vessel , says a spokesman for Rep. George Miller ( D. , Calif. ) , a sponsor of the bill . 
The spokesman says the `` glitch '' in the statute is `` the worst kind of Catch-22 . '' 
Many Law School Grads Find Classes Never End 
RECENT LAW school graduates are starting jobs with law firms this fall -- and heading back to class . 
Bar associations and consultants are offering more programs to teach associates all they need to know about law but did n't learn in law school . 
`` Law school teaches wonderful theory , but it does n't teach the nuts and bolts of practical lawyering , '' says Aaron Weitz , head of a New York County Lawyers ' Association committee that sponsors such a course . 
In the past , associates learned the basics from senior lawyers who acted as mentors . 
But these days , large firms hire as many as 30 new associates a year , and it 's impossible to personally train everyone , says Joel Henning of Hildebrandt Inc. , a consulting firm that runs training classes . 
The Hildebrandt course enables students to brush up on negotiation skills by role playing in simulated deals . 
Students also are taught to return clients ' phone calls immediately and to treat the support staff with respect . 
Many law firms sponsor their own programs . 
At the Baltimore firm of Weinberg & Green , new corporate and banking associates are required to enroll in a 20-class course . 
Partners lecture on how to form corporations , draft agreements and defend clients against unwanted tender offers . 
Now , clients know that new associates have had some practical training before working on their cases , says James J. Hanks , a partner at the firm . 
Los Angeles Creates A Courthouse for Kids 
THE CHILDREN of Los Angeles will soon have their own $ 52 million courthouse . 
The building , which will handle child abuse , custody and foster care cases , will be `` less formal , less threatening and just basically less grim than most courthouses , '' says Edmund Edelman , chairman of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors . 
Designs call for an L-shaped structure with a playground in the center . 
There will be recreation and movie rooms . 
Teens will be able to listen to music with headsets . 
Study halls , complete with reference materials , will be available . 
And there will be a nurse 's station and rooms for children to meet with social workers . 
The building 's 25 courtrooms will be smaller , says Charlene Saunders , a court administrator . 
The bench will be lower so the judge seems less intimidating , and walls will be painted in bright colors and covered with murals . 
Cases in Los Angeles County involving dependent children are usually heard in the Criminal Courts Building . 
`` We need to get the kids away from the criminals into a less traumatic environment , '' says Mr. Edelman . 
About 45,000 children in Los Angeles County are under court supervision , Mr. Edelman says , and an average of 1,500 new children are added each month . 
The courthouse , to be built in Monterey Park , is expected to open in the spring of 1992 . 
Law Firm Management Can Be Quite Rewarding 
IT PAYS to follow a management career path -- even at law firms . 
That 's the conclusion of a recent study of large law firms conducted by Altman & Weil Inc. , an Ardmore , Pa. , law firm consultant . 
Its survey of 96 firms , each with 100 to 1,000 lawyers , shows that managing partners earned an average of $ 395,974 in compensation and cash benefits in the firms ' 1988 fiscal years . 
Managing partners who responded to the survey typically spend over half their time supervising their firms ' day-to-day operations and just a little more than a third of their time practicing law . 
Partners in the survey who devote most of their time to practicing law earned an average of about $ 217,000 . 
Chairman Jamie Whitten ( D. , Miss . ) of the House Appropriations Committee proposed a $ 2.85 billion emergency funding package to assist California 's recovery from last week 's earthquake and extend further aid to East Coast victims of Hurricane Hugo . 
The sweeping measure incorporates $ 500 million in small-business loans , $ 1 billion in highway-construction funds and $ 1.25 billion divided between general emergency assistance and a reserve to be available to President Bush to meet unanticipated costs from the two disasters . 
The funds would be attached to a stop-gap spending bill required to keep most of the government operating past Wednesday . 
The measure is scheduled to be taken up by the Appropriations Committee today . 
The panel is expected to add provisions waiving restrictions on the use of federal highway funds and may also shift money within the package to bolster the share for the Small Business Administration . 
`` We will support it , we will thank him , and we will augment it where appropriate , '' said Rep. Vic Fazio ( D. , Calif . ) . 
Dubbed the `` Dire Emergency Supplemental to Meet the Needs of Natural Disasters of National Significance , '' the measure is vintage Whitten in asserting federal responsibility and in disdaining budget impediments . 
`` Such other amounts will be made available subsequently as required , '' the legislation reads , and the new obligations `` shall not be a charge against the Budget Act , Gramm-Rudman-Hollings , or other ceilings . 
Moody 's Investors Service Inc. said it lowered the ratings of some $ 145 million of Pinnacle debt because of `` accelerating deficiency in liquidity , '' which it said was evidenced by Pinnacle 's elimination of dividend payments . 
Henry Sargent Jr. , Pinnacle executive vice president , said the action `` wo n't really have any effect on us . 
We are n't selling bonds right now , and I do n't think it will affect the value of our existing bonds . '' 
The rating agency said it lowered the ratings on $ 75 million of the holding company 's convertible subordinated Eurodebentures to B-3 from B-1 . 
Moody 's said it also lowered the ratings of $ 70 million of Pinnacle 's MeraBank thrift unit long-term deposits to B-3 from B-2 , and on its subordinated debt to Ca from Caa . 
MeraBank 's rating for short-term deposits remains Not Prime . 
Securities of MeraBank were placed under review last May , and will remain under review for downgrade , the agency said . 
First , the somewhat affected idealism of the 1960s . 
Then , the all-too-sincere opportunism of the 1970s and 1980s . 
What now ? 
To judge from novels that mirror the contemporary scene , we 're back in the age of anxiety . 
Where '60s dropouts professed to scorn middle-class life and ambitious yuppies hoped to leave it far behind as they scaled the upper reaches of success , it now seems that so many people feel they 're slipping between the cracks , that middle-class life is viewed with nostalgia or outright longing . 
Lisa Zeidner 's third novel , `` Limited Partnerships '' ( North Point Press , 256 pages , $ 18.95 ) is a stylish , funny and thoughtful look at the way love relationships are affected by the pressures of money , or , more specifically , the lack of it . 
Nora Worth and Malcolm DeWitt , 33 and 39 respectively , live together in a townhouse in a transitional Philadelphia neighborhood . 
Malcolm , a former film-maker turned architect , has just seen his first big chance at a lucrative commission turn to dust with the arrest of his shady , obnoxious client , a fly-by-night real estate developer . 
Nora , who still has artistic aspirations , knows she is lucky to be working as a food stylist , prepping pies , burgers , frosty cold drinks and other comestibles to look as appetizing as possible in front of the camera . 
After all , she reasons , `` there were housewives with Nikons and degrees from cooking schools in France who would kill for her job . '' 
But Nora and Malcolm feel trapped . 
They seem to be having the `` worst of both worlds : artistic work with none of art 's integrity and no control over the finished product ; self-employment without fun or profit . '' 
It 's a downbeat , `` thirtysomething '' world , in which bright , still youngish people are engaged in a glossy version of day labor , doing free-lance , semi-professional work that brings little satisfaction or security but that they know they should be grateful to do . 
Uncertainty dogs every aspect of their lives . 
Malcolm faces bankruptcy and an IRS audit , but Nora finds an extra $ 30,000 in her bank account , suddenly increasing her available funds some fifteenfold . 
While she is wondering whether to live it up , and do something even more dramatic , say get married , her life is further complicated by the reappearance of an old flame , David , a film critic and actor who always seems to be just on the brink of stardom . 
In novels of an earlier vintage , David would have represented excitement and danger ; Malcolm , placid , middle-class security . 
The irony in this novel is that neither man represents a `` safe '' middle-class haven : Nora 's decision is between emotional excitement and emotional security , with no firm economic base anywhere . 
The characters confront a world in which it seems increasingly difficult to find a `` middle way '' between the extremes of success and failure , wealth and poverty . 
In making Malcolm and Nora such wonderfully representative specimens of their class and generation , Ms. Zeidner has somewhat neglected the task of making them distinctively individual characters . 
The humor of the story owes much to the fact that no hearts ( even the characters ' own ) are likely to bleed for the plight of health-food eaters . 
But readers may well feel the pangs of recognition . 
In any case , the foundering middle classes are n't the only ones in trouble -- or whose troubles provide material for fiction . 
`` Rascal Money '' ( Contemporary Books , 412 pages , $ 17.95 ) , a novel by consultant and business analyst Joseph R. Garber , tells the story of an innovative , well-run , widely respected computer manufacturing company called PegaSys as it faces a hostile takeover attempt by AIW , a much smaller corporation that is so incompetently managed as to constitute a standing joke in the business world . 
Patrician , dynamic Scott Thatcher , founder and head of PegaSys , initially finds the takeover threat risible . 
But , as he and his skilled team soon discover , they 're up against two factors they had n't counted on : first , a business climate in which a failing company with few assets and many debts can borrow against the assets of the successful company it hopes to acquire in order to finance the takeover ; second , that standing behind AIW is a sinister consortium of much bigger , shadier and shrewder foreign interests secretly providing the money and muscle for the deal . 
Mr. Garber manages to invest this tale of financial wars with the colorful characters and fast-paced action of a suspense novel . 
And like a spy or mystery story , this novel has strong elements of allegory , as the good and evil forces battle it out . 
Mr. Garber depicts these moral qualities with the broad brush strokes of a satire that occasionally descends to the realm of cliched caricatures . 
Standard-issue portraits of flaky Californians , snobbish homosexuals and Neanderthal union leaders undermine the force of the author 's perceptions . 
Yet the heavy-handedness of the satire also can be effective in a book like this : If the head of AIW were not portrayed as an utterly contemptible , malicious dolt , we would not much care whether his schemes were defeated , and would not be so diverted in the process . 
Ms. Rubin is a free-lance writer based in Los Angeles . 
High-definition television promises to be the TV of tomorrow , so it is a natural multibillion-dollar market . 
Although major U.S. manufacturers have all but ceded the main segment of that future business to Japan , not everyone here is ready to give up . 
A handful of small U.S. companies are struggling to develop the technology to build the screens for the thin , high-quality televisions that are expected to hang on living room walls by the end of the 1990s . 
With only small help from the government , these start-up concerns are trying to compete with the Goliaths of the Japanese consumer electronics industry , which enjoy considerable backing from the Japanese government . 
Photonics Technology Inc. of Northwood , Ohio , aims to use a new form of plasma technology to put movie-quality images on a TV display that is 40 inches in diameter but only a few inches thick . 
Planar Systems Inc. of Beaverton , Ore. , the largest of these firms , with $ 20 million in annual revenue , has similar plans . 
It already has had success in electroluminescence , another promising technology adaptable for high-definition television . 
Two other firms , Ovonic Imaging Systems Inc. of Troy , Mich. , and Magnascreen Corp. of Pittsburgh are developing a variation of the flat-panel screens called active-matrix liquid crystal displays . 
The new technologies are intended to retire the cathode-ray tube , which accounts for most of the bulk of the conventional TV set . 
Replacing the cathode-ray tube with a large , thin screen is the key to the creation of a high-definition television , or HDTV , which is expected to become a $ 30 billion business world-wide within a decade . 
Large U.S. companies are interested in other segments of the HDTV business , such as signal-processing and broadcast equipment . 
But except for Zenith Electronics Corp. and International Business Machines Corp. , which is collaborating with Toshiba on computer displays , they are poorly positioned to exploit advances in large panels . 
General Electric Co. recently sold off its interests in liquid-crystal displays to Thompson-CSF of France . 
`` We found the market not developing as we thought it would , '' a GE spokesman says . 
The small U.S. firms are persisting because of their strong positions in patents , and because the prize is still there to be seized . 
`` No one yet has shown the ability to manufacture these panels '' at commercial costs , says Zvi Yaniv , the president of Ovonic Imaging . 
He says he thinks his company is just a few years from doing that . 
The Bush administration , hearing conflicting advice about what its role in HDTV should be , is n't doing much for now . 
The only material support it is extending to the struggling U.S. industry is $ 30 million in awards from the Pentagon 's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency . 
The DARPA funds are a pittance compared with what Japan and other prospective competitors are spending . 
The Commerce Department estimates that Japanese government and industry spending on HDTV research is already over $ 1 billion . 
`` Unless it gets more help , the U.S. industry wo n't have a chance , '' says Peter Friedman , Photonics 's executive vice president . 
Thus far , almost all of the basic technology relating to high-definition television has come from U.S. laboratories . 
But Peter Brody , Magnascreen 's president , says Japanese companies are poised to snatch the technology and put it to commercial use , just as they did with earlier U.S. innovations in color television and video recording . 
In the 1970s , Mr. Brody helped develop the first display panels based on active-matrix liquid crystals at Westinghouse Electric Corp. 's research labs in Pittsburgh . 
The panels are like oversized semiconductors surfaced with a million or more picture elements , each contributing to the color and tone of a TV image . 
In 1979 , however , Westinghouse abandoned the project along with its stake in advanced television . 
Mr. Brody left the company to find other backers . 
He has a claim to the right to commercialize the Westinghouse patents , but he contends that those patents are being infringed by a number of Japanese producers . 
`` Most American investors have just given up , '' Mr. Brody says . 
`` They are n't prepared to compete in an area where the Japanese want to enter . '' 
Many critics question the industry 's need for federal support ; the Pentagon justifies its help on national-security grounds . 
`` We do n't see a domestic source for some of our { HDTV } requirements , and that 's a source of concern , '' says Michael Kelly , director of DARPA 's defense manufacturing office . 
So DARPA is trying to keep the industry interested in developing large display panels by doling out research funds . 
HDTV already has some military applications , such as creating realistic flight simulations and transmitting information to combat commanders . 
The Navy is ordering displays for its Aegis cruisers and the Army wants smaller versions for its Abrams battle tanks . 
The Commerce Department also is trying to encourage HDTV because of the benefits that could spin off to the semiconductor and computer industries . 
`` It is n't just yuppie television , '' argues Jack Clifford , director of the department 's office of microelectronics and instrumentation . 
`` The industry will create industrial products such as displays for work stations and medical diagnostic equipment before it acquires a mass consumer market . '' 
Although some HDTV advocates are calling for other forms of aid , such as antitrust relief for research consortia , the small firms simply would prefer more DARPA funds . 
Each claims to possess the right technology and wants just a bit more money to make it commercial . 
They also want U.S. trade policy to reflect the Pentagon and Commerce department 's concern over their future . 
They all are strongly opposed to a petition from several Japanese TV manufacturers , including Matsushita , Hitachi , and Toshiba , to exempt portable color TVs with liquid-crystal displays from anti-dumping duties that the U.S. imposes on the larger Japanese color TVs . 
And they want the U.S. to help them sell overseas . 
Planar President James Hurd says he has to pay tariffs as high as 15 % to sell his display panels in Japan and South Korea , while panels from those countries enter the U.S. duty-free . 
`` This is n't a technology issue , but an attitude issue , '' he says . 
`` We just have n't learned what it takes to compete . 
Burmah Oil PLC , a British independent oil and specialty-chemicals marketing concern , said SHV Holdings N.V. has built up a 7.5 % stake in the company . 
The holding of 13.6 million shares is up from a 6.7 % stake that Burmah announced SHV held as of last Monday . 
SHV , of the Netherlands , which last year merged its North Sea oil and gas operations with those of Calor Group PLC and which owns 40 % of Calor , was identified as a possible suitor for Burmah . 
Burmah said it had n't held any discussions with SHV and that `` no deal of any nature is in contemplation . 
The top state environmental official in Massachusetts said Clean Harbors Inc. 's environmental-impact statement for a proposed incinerator in Braintree was inadequate . 
The official , John DeVillars , asked Clean Harbors for more information before ruling on a permit for the site . 
Critics of the plan , including the town of Braintree , say the incinerator is a health hazard . 
Clean Harbors , based in Quincy , said it `` will proceed expeditiously '' to submit the data requested . 
Alan McKim , chief executive officer of Clean Harbors said he was `` very much encouraged '' by the official 's praise of Clean Harbors for the quality of some of the data in the report . 
Citizens & Southern Corp. said it signed a definitive agreement to acquire Security Pacific Corp. 's New York-based factoring unit . 
Terms of the bank holding companies ' agreement were n't disclosed . 
Factoring involves the purchase and collection of another company 's receivables . 
Citizens , based in Atlanta , said it has about $ 4.6 billion in factored sales annually ; the Security Pacific unit has about $ 1.8 billion annually . 
Security Pacific 's factoring business works with companies in the apparel , textile and food industries , among others . 
The Office of Thrift Supervision banned B.J. Garman , a former director of the failed Vision Banc Savings Association of Kingsville , Texas , from working in any financial institution insured by the government . 
The office , a Treasury Department unit that is the successor to the Federal Home Loan Bank Board , said this was the first announcement of an enforcement action since this year 's thrift-bailout legislation ordered that all such actions by federal banking regulators be made public . 
Generally , regulators have n't announced enforcement actions in the past . 
Indeed , the OTS said that before the law took effect Aug. 9 , it banned another `` key Vision Banc insider '' from insured financial institutions . 
That individual was n't identified . 
Vision Banc was placed in government conservatorship in March , and it operates under the control of the Resolution Trust Corp. , the agency created to sell or liquidate insolvent thrifts . 
The OTS did n't say specifically why the action was taken against Ms. Garman . 
However , it said examiners found a variety of insider dealings at the thrift , including `` extraordinary loan commissions '' paid to a firm associated with Vision Banc officials , and loans diverted through borrowers back to the thrift officials . 
Ms. Garman could n't be reached for comment . 
Arizona Instrument Corp. said it expects to post a third-quarter net loss of about $ 600,000 , or 25 cents to 27 cents a share , compared with net income of $ 214,000 , or 10 cents a share , a year earlier . 
The Tempe , Ariz. , maker of underground fuel-storage systems said the most recent period was affected by customers ' problems complying with recent Environmental Protection Agency regulations . 
For the nine months , the company expects to post a net loss of about $ 879,000 , or 35 cents to 40 cents a share , on revenue of $ 6.5 million . 
A year earlier , it had a loss of $ 199,203 or nine cents a share , on revenue of $ 7.6 million . 
Growth is good . 
At least , that 's a theme emerging among many money managers who are anxious both to preserve the handsome stock-market gains they have already achieved this year and to catch the next wave of above-average performers . 
They are starting to buy growth stocks . 
Remember them ? 
The upper echelon of this group were shares of the `` nifty 50 '' companies whose profits of the 1960s and early 1970s grew steadily , if not spectacularly , through thick and thin . 
That sort of workhorse performance sounds made to order for a time when corporate profits overall have been weakening from the brisk increases of recent years . 
The current flood of third-quarter reports are producing many more negative surprises than positive ones . 
Those are unwelcome trends in a year that the Dow Jones Industrial Average has risen 23 % so far , even with the 190.58-point plunge on Oct. 13 ; broader market measures are in the same neighborhood . 
The question for investors is , how to protect these returns and yet reach a little for additional gains . 
That 's the path of reasoning leading to growth stocks . 
`` I think it is a good theme for what looks to be an uncertain market , '' says Steven Einhorn , partner at Goldman Sachs . 
Growth stocks may be as big as Philip Morris or medium-sized such as Circuit City Stores , but their common characteristic is a history of increasing profits on the order of at least 15 % to 20 % a year , money managers say . 
`` The period when growth stocks should be performing well is when their earnings are growing at a superior rate to the general level of corporate profits , '' says Stephen Boesel , president of T. Rowe Price 's Growth and Income Fund . 
Growth stocks also are attractive in periods of market volatility , which many investors and analysts expect in the weeks ahead as everybody tries to discern where the economy is heading . 
This kind of jumpy uncertainty reminds John Calverley , senior economist for American Express Bank , of the 1969-72 period , when the industrial average rolled through huge ranges and investors flocked to the shares of companies with proven earnings records , which became known as the `` nifty 50 . '' 
And they will again , say money-manager proponents of the growth-stock theme . 
Cabanne Smith , president of a money management company bearing his name , predicts that investment companies using computers to identify companies with earnings `` momentum '' will climb on the growth-stock bandwagon as the overall corporate earnings outlook deteriorates further . 
He also thinks foreign investors , who are showing signs of more discriminate investing , will join the pursuit and pump up prices . 
`` We 're just seeing the beginning of a shift , '' Mr. Smith says . 
Mr. Smith recommends Cypress Semiconductor that is currently showing a robust 63 % earnings growth rate . 
Ronald Sloan , executive vice president of Siebel Capital Management , likes Wellman Inc. , a company that recycles plastic into synthetic fibers for carpeting . 
Mr. Sloan praises the company as recession resistant and notes that it has an annual earnings growth rate of 32 % a year over the past five years . 
Wellman stock closed Friday at 39 3\/8 , up 1\/8 ; Mr. Sloan thinks that in a year it could hit 60 . 
Others preach the gospel of buying only blue-chip growth stocks . 
Carmine Grigoli , chief market strategist for First Boston , who still says , `` We expect the Dow average { to be at } 3000 by mid-1990 , '' nonetheless foresees a sluggish economy in the meantime . 
He recommends such blue-chip growth stalwarts as Philip Morris , PepsiCo , CPC International , Reebok International , and Limited Inc . 
All have a fiveyear earnings growth rate of more than 20 % a year . 
Some money managers are pursuing growth stocks at the expense of those that rise and fall along with the economic cycle . 
`` One of the stories of the fourth quarter is that we will get an unusual number of earnings disappointments from companies sensitive to the economy , '' says Mr. Boesel of T. Rowe Price . 
James Wright , chief investment officer for Banc One Asset Management , says , `` We 've been selling a disproportionate share of cyclical companies and buying a disproportionate share of high earnings stocks . '' 
He recently trimmed his portfolio of International Paper , Dow Chemical , Quantum Chemical , International Business Machines and Digital Equipment . 
He is putting money in Dress Barn , Circuit City Stores , Bruno 's , and Rubbermaid . 
Big cyclical companies are using `` all the tricks they can to stabilize earnings , '' says Mr. Sloan . 
He cites IBM , which reported a 30 % earnings decline in the third quarter , and which last week announced a $ 1 billion buy-back of its shares . 
`` What they are telling you is that they do n't have the ability to generate higher returns internally , '' says Mr. Sloan . 
`` When they are buying back stock at 10 times earnings , they are suggesting that the rate of return on competing internal projects is below '' returns on the stock . 
IBM says it considers its shares a good investment . 
But not all strategists or money managers are ready to throw in the towel completely on cyclicals . 
Growth stocks may underperform cyclical stocks next year if the Federal Reserve begins to let interest rates drift sufficiently lower to boost the economy . 
Goldman Sachs 's Mr. Einhorn , for one , subscribes to that scenario . 
He suggests investors think about buying cyclical shares in the weeks ahead , as well as growth issues . 
Friday 's Market Activity 
Stock prices finished about unchanged Friday in quiet expiration trading . 
Traders anticipated a volatile session due to the October expiration of stock-index futures and options , and options on individual stocks . 
But there were fewer price swings than expected . 
Buy order imbalances on several big stocks were posted by the New York Stock Exchange . 
But block trading desks and money managers made a concerted effort to meet the imbalances with stock to sell , one trader said . 
As a result , the Dow Jones Industrial Average drifted in narrow ranges in the final hour of trading , and closed 5.94 higher to 2689.14 . 
New York Stock Exchange volume was 164,830,000 . 
Advancers on the Big Board lagged decliners 662 to 829 . 
For the week , the industrial average gained 119.88 points , or 4.7 % , the biggest weekly point advance ever and a better than 50 % rebound from the 190.58 point loss the industrial average logged Oct. 13 . 
Broader market averages were little changed in the latest session . 
Standard & Poor 's 500-Stock Index gained 0.03 to 347.16 , the Dow Jones Equity Market Index fell 0.02 to 325.50 , and the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index fell 0.05 to 192.12 . 
Most of last week 's surge in the industrial average came on Monday , when the average rose 88.12 points as market players snapped up blue-chip issues and shunned the broad market . 
That contrast was reflected in the smaller weekly percentage gains recorded by the broader averages . 
The S&P 500 rose 4 % , the Dow Jones Equity Market index gained 3.7 % and the New York Stock Exchange composite index added 3.5 % . 
The Dow Jones Transportation Average fell 32.71 to 1230.80 amid renewed weakness in the airline sector . 
UAL skidded 21 5\/8 to 168 1\/2 on 2.2 million shares . 
On the week , UAL was down nearly 40 % . 
The latest drop followed a decision by British Airways , which had supported the $ 300-a-share buy-out offer for UAL from a labor-management group , not to participate in any revised bid . 
British Airways fell 1 to 31 7\/8 . 
While most other airline issues took their cue from UAL , USAir Group rose 1 3\/4 to 43 1\/4 on 1.5 million shares amid speculation about a possible takeover proposal from investor Marvin Davis . 
USA Today reported that Mr. Davis , who had pursued UAL before dropping his bid Wednesday , has acquired a stake of about 3 % in USAir . 
Unocal fell 1 1\/2 to 52 1\/4 and Burlington Resources declined 7\/8 to 45 5\/8 . 
At a meeting with analysts , British Petroleum officials dispelled speculation that the company may take over a U.S. oil company , according to Dow Jones Professional Investor Report . 
Both Unocal and Burlington had been seen as potential targets for a British Petroleum bid . 
Paper and forest-products stocks declined after Smith Barney , Harris Upham & Co. lowered investment ratings on a number of issues in the two sectors , based on a forecast that pulp prices will fall sharply . 
International Paper dropped 5\/8 to 51 , Georgia-Pacific fell 1 3\/4 to 56 1\/4 , Stone Container tumbled 1 1\/2 to 26 5\/8 , Great Northern Nekoosa went down 5\/8 to 38 3\/8 and Weyerhaeuser lost 7\/8 to 28 1\/8 . 
Dun & Bradstreet dropped 3\/4 to 51 1\/8 on 1.9 million shares on uncertainty about the company 's earnings prospects . 
Merrill Lynch cut its rating and 1990 earnings estimate Thursday , citing weakness in its credit-rating business . 
Lamson & Sessions , which posted sharply lower third-quarter earnings and forecast that results for the fourth quarter might be `` near break-even , '' fell 1\/2 to 9 1\/4 . 
Winnebago Industries slid 5\/8 to 5 1\/4 . 
The company , which reported that its loss for the fiscal quarter ended Aug. 26 widened from a year earlier , cut its semiannual dividend in half in response to the earnings weakness . 
MassMutual Corporate Investors fell 3 to 29 after declaring a quarterly dividend of 70 cents a share , down from 95 cents a share . 
Stoneridge Resources Inc. said it will begin an offering of rights equivalent to 2.6 million common shares and valued at $ 22,750,000 . 
The Bloomfield Hills , Mich.-based real-estate holding company said it will offer the rights at $ 8.75 a share to shareholders of record on Oct. 26 . 
The offering is scheduled to expire on Nov. 30 . 
The company said it will use the proceeds of the offering for debt reduction and general corporate purposes , including acquisitions . 
Stockholders may buy one share at the subscription price for every four shares of stock they own . 
Stockholders who exercise all their rights may buy additional shares , the company said . 
The company said it has an option to increase the offering by up to 350,000 shares . 
The following U.S. Treasury , corporate and municipal offerings are tentatively scheduled for sale this week , according to Dow Jones Capital Markets Report : $ 15.6 billion three-month and six-month bills . 
$ 10 billion of two-year notes . 
Resolution Funding Corp. to sell $ 4.5 billion 30-year bonds . 
Aim Prime Rate Plus Fund Inc. -- 10 million common shares , via PaineWebber Inc . 
Allied Capital Corp. II -- 6,500,000 common shares , via Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc . 
American Cyanamid Co. -- 1,250,000 common shares , via Merrill Lynch Capital Markets . 
Associated Natural Gas Corp. -- 1,400,000 common shares , via Dillon Read & Co . 
B & H Crude Carriers Ltd. -- Four million common shares , via Salomon Brothers Inc . 
Baldwin Technology Co. -- 2,600,000 Class A shares , via Smith Barney , Harris Upham & Co . 
Blockbuster Entertainment Corp. -- $ 250 million ( face amount ) Liquid Yield Option Notes , via Merrill Lynch . 
Chemex Pharmaceuticals Inc. -- 1,200,000 units , via PaineWebber . 
Immune Response Corp. -- Three million common shares , via Merrill Lynch . 
Marsam Pharmaceuticals Inc. -- 1,300,000 common shares , via Smith Barney , Harris Upham . 
RMI Titanium Co. -- 15 million common shares , via Salomon Brothers Inc . 
Tidewater Inc. -- 4,631,400 common shares , via Salomon Brothers Inc . 
Massachusetts -- Approximately $ 230 million of general bonds , consolidated loan of 1989 , Series D , via competitive bid . 
Montgomery County , Maryland -- $ 75 million of general consolidated public improvement bonds of 1989 , Series B , via competitive bid . 
Trinity River Authority , Texas -- $ 134,750,000 of regional wastewater system improvement revenue bonds , Series 1989 , via competitive bid . 
City and County of Honolulu , Hawaii -- $ 75 million of obligation bonds , 1989 Series B , due 1993-2009 , via competitive bid . 
Beverly Hills -- $ 110 million of civic center project certificates of participation , Series 1989 , via a Goldman , Sachs & Co. group . 
Broward County School District , Florida -- $ 185 million of school district general bonds , via a First Boston Corp. group . 
Connecticut Housing Finance Authority -- $ 132,620,000 of housing mortgage revenue ( AMT and non-AMT ) bonds , via a PaineWebber group . 
Maryland Stadium Authority -- $ 137,550,000 of sports facilities lease revenue Alternative Minimum Tax ( AMT ) bonds , Series 1989 D , via a Morgan Stanley & Co. group . 
Michigan -- $ 80 million of Michigan First general bonds , including $ 70 million of environmental protection project bonds and $ 10 million of recreation project bonds , via a Shearson Lehman Hutton group . 
West Virginia Parkways Economic Development and Tourism Authority -- $ 143 million of parkway revenue bonds , Series 1989 , via a PaineWebber group . 
San Antonio , Texas -- $ 640 million of gas and electric revenue refunding bonds , via a First Boston group . 
MCI COMMUNICATIONS Corp. said it filed a shelf registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission for issuance of as much as $ 750 million of debt securities . 
The debt will include medium-term notes sold through Merrill Lynch Capital Markets ; Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. ; Goldman , Sachs & Co. and Salomon Brothers Inc . 
The funds will be used for refinancing existing debt of the Washington , D.C. , concern at lower interest rates and for other general purposes . 
The effective date of the registration is to be determined by the SEC . 
A group including ESL Partners Ltd. , a Fort Worth , Texas , investment partnership , and Richard E. Rainwater , a former adviser to the Fort Worth Bass family , said it reduced its stake in Anacomp Inc. to 3.6 % of the common shares outstanding . 
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission , the group said it sold 1,325,900 Anacomp common shares from Aug. 31 to last Wednesday for $ 4.48 to $ 5.84 a share , resulting in a drop in its holdings to 1,351,662 shares . 
No reason was given in the filing for the sales . 
An Anacomp official said the Indianapolis computer-services concern had no comment on the group 's share sales . 
In March , the group disclosed it held a 7.2 % stake in Anacomp for investment purposes . 
It said then it had had and would continue to have discussions with Anacomp 's management concerning its investment . 
Home Beneficial Corp. , Richmond , Va. , said it contracted to sell its 50 % interest in a Richmond-area shopping mall to a buyer that was n't identified . 
The life-insurance holding company said the sale would result in an after-tax gain of about $ 32 million , or $ 3.09 a share , in the first quarter of 
The company also said it will adopt new accounting standards in the first quarter . 
The change will result in a charge of about $ 8.5 million , or 82 cents a share , because of an increase in deferred income-tax liability . 
In the first quarter of 1988 , the company earned $ 10 million , or 94 cents a share . 
Following is a weekly listing of unadited net asset values of publicly traded investment fund shares , reported by the companies as of Friday 's close . 
Also shown is the closing listed market price or a dealer-to-dealer asked price of each fund 's shares , with the percentage of difference . 
Closed End Bond Funds 
Flexible Portfolio Funds 
Specialized Equity and Convertible Funds 
a - Ex-dividend . 
b - As of Thursday 's close . 
c - Translated at Commercial Rand exchange rate . 
e - In Canadian dollars . 
f - As of Wednesday 's close . 
A shareholder filed suit , seeking to block Unitel Video Inc. 's proposed plan to be acquired by a new affiliate of closely held Kenmare Capital Corp. for $ 15 a share , or $ 33.6 million . 
The suit , which seeks class-action status , was filed in Delaware Chancery Court . 
The complaint alleges that the price is `` unfair and grossly inadequate '' and that the defendants are seeking to ensure a `` lockup '' of the purchase of Unitel , thereby discouraging other bids . 
It seeks unspecified money damages . 
The New York company called the lawsuit without merit . 
Shareholders are scheduled to vote on the transaction Nov . 
This Toronto closed-end fund cut the annual dividend on its Class A common shares to one Canadian cent from 10 Canadian cents . 
The fund invests mainly in gold and silver bullion . 
It said the reduced dividend reflects the low price for precious metals . 
Greg Davies , Central Fund 's vice president , finance , said losses for the fiscal year ending Oct. 31 could be as high as one million Canadian dollars ( US$ 852,000 ) . 
The fund last had a profit in 1985 . 
The new dividend rate is payable Nov. 15 to holders of record Oct. 31 . 
In American Stock Exchange composite trading Friday , Central Fund was unchanged at $ 4.6875 a share . 
Comair Holdings Inc. said in Cincinnati that it bought Airline Aviation Academy , a pilot training school based at Sanford Regional Airport near Orlando , Fla . 
Comair said it paid cash but declined to disclose the price . 
Comair Holdings is the parent of Comair Inc. , a regional air carrier . 
Airline Aviation , which has annual revenue of $ 5 million to $ 6 million , has great growth potential because of the large number of U.S. pilots nearing retirement age , Comair said . 
The unit will be renamed Comair Aviation Academy and will continue to be headed by Scott Williams , a son of its founder , Comair said . 
The collapse of a $ 6.79 billion buy-out of United Airlines parent UAL Corp. has handed Wall Street 's takeover stock speculators their worst loss ever on a single deal . 
Their $ 700 million-plus in estimated paper losses easily tops the $ 400 million in paper losses the takeover traders , known as arbitragers , suffered in 1982 when Gulf Oil Co. dropped a $ 4.8 billion offer for Cities Service Co . 
In the six trading days since the UAL labor-management buy-out group failed to get bank financing , culminating Friday with the withdrawal of its partner British Airways PLC , UAL stock has plummeted by 41 % to 168 1\/2 from 285 1\/4 . 
The arbs may recoup some of their paper losses if the UAL deal gets patched up again , as they did in 1982 when Occidental Petroleum Co. rescued them with a $ 4 billion takeover of Cities Service . 
In the meantime , the question faced by investors is : What is UAL stock worth ? 
The short answer , on a fundamental basis , is that airline analysts say the stock is worth somewhere between $ 135 and $ 150 a share . 
That 's based on a multiple of anywhere between 8.5 to 10 times UAL earnings , which are estimated to come in somewhere around $ 16 a share this year . 
Airline stocks typically sell at a discount of about one-third to the stock market 's price-earnings ratio -- which is currently about 13 times earnings . 
That 's because airline earnings , like those of auto makers , have been subject to the cyclical ups-and-downs of the economy . 
That analysis matches up with stock traders ' reports that , despite the huge drop in the stock , UAL has n't returned to the level at which it could attract buying by institutions solely on the basis of earnings . 
So anyone buying the stock now is betting on some special transaction such as a recapitalization or takeover , and must do so using some guesswork about the likelihood of such an event . 
One analyst , who asked not to be identified , said he believes that the UAL pilots and management can put together a bid `` in the $ 225 area , '' but that it could take three to four months to close . 
At that level , and given the uncertainty , he believes UAL stock should trade closer to 
Other observers note that UAL 's board , having accepted a bid of $ 300 a share , might hold out for a new bid much closer to the original level -- even if it means that the management goes back to running the company for a while and lets things return to normal . 
By that logic , the closing of a deal could be much further away than three to four months , even though the eventual price might be higher . 
Investment bankers following UAL agree that the strongest impetus for an eventual deal is that the pilots have been attempting a buy-out for more than two years , and are n't likely to stop , having come so close to success . 
The pilots have a strong financing tool in their willingness to cut their annual compensation by $ 200 million , and to commit $ 200 million from their retirement funds . 
On Friday , they also persuaded the UAL flight attendants to join them . 
However , investment bankers say that banks are n't likely to lend the almost $ 5 billion that would be necessary for a takeover even at a lower price without someone putting up a hefty wad of cash -- probably even greater than the 17 % in cash put up by investors in the leveraged takeover of Northwest Airlines parent NWA Corp. in July . 
Banks want to see someone putting up real cash at risk , that is , subordinate to the bank debt in any deal . 
That way , they figure , someone else has an even stronger motivation to make sure the deal is going to work , because they would be losing their money before the banks lost theirs . 
Banks also want to be able to call someone on the telephone to fix a problem with a deal that goes bad -- preferably someone other than a union leader . 
That leaves the pilots still in need of cash totaling around $ 1 billion -- far more than either they or the flight attendants can lay their hands on from retirement funds alone . 
One obstacle to the pilots ' finding such a huge amount of cash is their insistence on majority ownership . 
Investors such as Marvin Davis of Los Angeles who have sought airline ownership this year have insisted they , not the pilots , must have control . 
One way out of that dilemma could be a partial recapitalization in which the pilots would wind up sharing the value of their concessions with public shareholders . 
The pilots could borrow against the value of their concessions , using the proceeds to buy back stock from the public and give themselves the majority control they have been seeking . 
But it is n't clear that banks would lend sufficient money to deliver a big enough price to shareholders . 
The lack of any new cash probably would still leave the banks dissatisfied . 
In advising the UAL board on the various bids for the airline , starting with one for $ 240 a share from Mr. Davis , the investment bank of First Boston came up with a wide range of potential values for the company , depending on appraisal methods and assumptions . 
Using the the NWA takeover as a benchmark , First Boston on Sept. 14 estimated that UAL was worth $ 250 to $ 344 a share based on UAL 's results for the 12 months ending last June 30 , but only $ 235 to $ 266 based on a management estimate of results for 1989 . 
First Boston 's estimates had been higher before management supplied a 1989 projection . 
Using estimates of the company 's future earnings under a variety of scenarios , First Boston estimated UAL 's value at $ 248 to $ 287 a share if its future labor costs conform to Wall Street projections ; $ 237 to $ 275 if the company reaches a settlement with pilots similar to one at NWA ; $ 98 to $ 121 under an adverse labor settlement , and $ 229 to $ 270 under a pilot contract imposed by the company following a strike . 
And using liquidation value assuming the sale of all UAL assets , First Boston estimated the airline is worth $ 253 to $ 303 a share . 
Unfortunately , all those estimates came before airline industry fundamentals deteriorated during the past month . 
American Airlines parent AMR and USAir Group , both subject to takeover efforts themselves , have each warned of declining results . 
Some analysts do n't expect a quick revival of any takeover by the pilots . 
The deal has , as one takeover expert puts it , `` so many moving parts . 
I do n't see anybody who 's sophisticated getting his name associated with this mess until the moving parts stop moving . '' 
In addition to the need for another cash equity investor , the other moving parts include : the pilots themselves , who can scuttle rival deals by threatening to strike ; the machinists union , the pilots ' longtime rivals who helped scuttle the pilots ' deal ; and regulators in Washington , whose opposition to foreign airline investment helped throw the deal into doubt . 
In the meantime , the arbs are bleeding . 
Wall Street traders and analysts estimate that takeover stock traders own UAL stock and options equal to as many as 6.5 million shares , or about 30 % of the total outstanding . 
Frank Gallagher , an analyst with Phoenix Capital Corp. in New York , estimates that the arbs paid an average of about $ 280 a share for their UAL positions . 
That would indicate that the arbs have paper losses on UAL alone totalling $ 725 million . 
UAL Corp . ( NYSE ; Symbol : UAL ) 
Business : Airline 
Year ended Dec. 31 , 1988 : 
Sales : $ 8.98 billion 
Net income \* : $ 599.9 million ; or $ 20.20 a share 
Second quarter , June 30 , 1989 : Per-share earnings : $ 6.52 vs. $ 5.77 
Average daily trading volume : 881,969 shares 
Common shares outstanding : 21.6 million 
Eastern Enterprises , bolstered by improved tonnages in its marine-shipping unit , had a narrower third-quarter net loss of $ 1.1 million , or five cents a share . 
Last year , Eastern had a quarter loss of $ 1.7 million , or eight cents a share . 
Quarter revenue rose 44 % to $ 160.1 million from $ 111.2 million a year ago . 
The Weston , Mass. , utilities and marine-transport concern said results for the third quarter , usually a money-losing one because of the seasonality of the gas business , were also aided by higher gas sales and the May 1989 acquisition of Water Products Company . 
For the nine months , Eastern had net income of $ 41.8 million , or $ 1.80 a share , up 23 % from $ 33.9 million or $ 1.46 a share a year ago . 
Revenue grew 24 % to $ 614.5 million from $ 497.1 million . 
Convex Computer Corp. , continuing its rapid growth while other computer companies falter , reported an 87 % increase in third-quarter net income from a year earlier and a 50 % increase in revenue . 
Net was $ 3.1 million , or 16 cents a share , up from $ 1.6 million , or nine cents a share . 
Revenue was $ 41.2 million , up from $ 27.5 million . 
For the nine months , net was $ 7.7 million , or 41 cents a share , up 97 % from $ 3.9 million , or 22 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue was $ 111.9 million , up 50 % from $ 74.8 million . 
Convex makes supercomputers that sell for up to $ 2 million and has an installed base of more than 550 systems and 340 customers world-wide . 
During the third quarter , it said , it won several significant contracts , including a five-year contract with the National Institutes of Health valued at an estimated $ 8 million . 
Earlier this month , Convex made a bid to outflank other supercomputer competitors like Digital Equipment Corp. and International Business Machines Corp. by adopting an open set of standards and introducing new hardware and software to link different systems . 
The new products allow customers to add Convex machines to established systems made by other manufacturers , which `` opens up a phenomenal market for us , '' said Robert J. Paluck , Convex 's chairman , president and chief executive . 
Convex also recently agreed to use Posix , a standard for the computer language called UNIX . 
Posix is one of three or four versions of UNIX , but it is increasingly required by the federal government as it tries to standardize its computer systems . 
Most other supercomputer manufacturers have yet to adopt the Posix standard , Mr. Paluck said , adding that they prefer to maintain proprietary systems that lock in customers . 
`` They want a lobster trap -- once you get in , you ca n't get out , '' he said . 
`` But the customer does n't want that . '' 
Convex closed in over-the-counter trading on Friday at $ 15.375 a share , down 12.5 cents . 
Troubled Saatchi & Saatchi Co. has attracted offers for some of its advertising units , with potential suitors including Interpublic Group , but has rejected them , people familiar with the company said . 
Industry executives said Interpublic approached Saatchi in August about buying its Campbell-Mithun-Esty unit , but was turned down by Chairman Maurice Saatchi . 
More recently , Interpublic inquired about one of Saatchi 's smaller communications companies -- identified as the Rowland public relations firm by several industry executives -- but again was rebuffed , they said . 
Interpublic 's chairman and chief executive officer , Philip Geier Jr. , made the pitches in visits to Mr. Saatchi in London , the executives said . 
A Saatchi spokesman declined to comment about Interpublic . 
But the spokesman confirmed that Saatchi has received several inquiries from companies interested in acquiring its Campbell-Mithun and Rowland units . 
He added , `` We have no intention of selling either business . '' 
Interpublic declined comment . 
The offers come as Saatchi is struggling through the most troubled period in its 19-year history . 
Takeover speculation has been rife , its consulting business is on the block , and its largest shareholder , Southeastern Asset Management , has said it 's been approached by third parties regarding a possible restructuring . 
Analysts have continually lowered their earnings estimates for the company , and their outlook , at least for the short term , is bleak . 
In the midst of the current turmoil , Saatchi is attempting to shore up its ad businesses . 
It named a new chief executive officer , former IMS International head Robert Louis-Dreyfus . 
It rebuffed an offer by Carl Spielvogel , head of Saatchi 's Backer Spielvogel Bates unit , to lead a management buy-out of all or part of Saatchi . 
And last week , people close to Saatchi said Maurice Saatchi and his brother , Charles , would lead a buy-out if a hostile bid emerged . 
But Saatchi 's troubles have only whipped up interest among outsiders interested in picking off pieces of its ad businesses . 
While Saatchi 's major agency networks -- Backer Spielvogel and Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising -- would be difficult for any ad firm to buy because of potential client conflicts , its smaller businesses are quite attractive . 
Campbell-Mithun-Esty , for example , has had big problems at its New York office , but offers strong offices in other areas of the country , including Minneapolis and Chicago . 
That would would make it appealing to a network such as Interpublic that already has a healthy New York presence . 
( While there would be some client conflicts , they would n't be nearly as onerous as with Saatchi 's other agencies . ) 
Campbell-Mithun also would be a sizable addition to an agency network : It has billings of about $ 850 million and blue-chip clients including General Mills , Jeep / Eagle and Dow Brands . 
Rowland , meanwhile , has expanded aggressively , and now ranks as the fifth-largest U.S. public relations firm , according to O'Dwyer's Directory of Public Relations Firms . 
It would be attractive to an agency such as Interpublic , one of the few big agency groups without an affiliated public relations firm of its own . 
Other Saatchi units include ad agency McCaffrey & McCall , which has the Mercedes account and which has been attempting to buy itself back ; and Howard Marlboro , a sports and event marketing firm . 
Despite Saatchi 's firm stand against selling its ad units , U.S. analysts believe the company may ultimately sell some of the smaller units . 
Mr. Louis-Dreyfus , in a recent interview , said he might sell `` a marginal agency or office . '' 
Analysts believe he may ultimately dispose of some of the non-advertising businesses . 
Prudential 's Final Four 
Prudential Insurance Co. of America said it selected four agencies to pitch its $ 60 million to $ 70 million account . 
In addition to Backer Spielvogel Bates , a Saatchi unit that has handled the account since 1970 , the other agencies include Lowe Marschalk , a unit of the Lowe Group ; Grey Advertising ; and WPP Group 's Scali , McCabe , Sloves agency . 
All agencies are New York-based . 
A spokesman for the insurance and financial services firm , based in Newark , N.J. , said it hopes to make a decision within three to four months . 
Jamaica Fires Back 
The Jamaica Tourist Board , in the wake of Young & Rubicam 's indictment on charges that it bribed Jamaican officials to win the account in 1981 , released a scathing memo blaming the agency for the embarrassing incident . 
The memo attempts to remove the tourist board as far as possible from the agency , which pleaded innocent to the charges . 
Among other things , the memo contends that Young & Rubicam gave false assurances that the investigation would n't uncover any information that would `` embarrass the government of Jamaica or the Jamaica Tourist Board . '' 
It also contends that Young & Rubicam never told the tourist board about its relationship with Ad Ventures , a Jamaican firm hired by the agency . 
The U.S. indictment charges Ad Ventures was a front used to funnel kickbacks to the then-minister of tourism . 
The memo also chastises the agency for the timing of its announcement Thursday that it would no longer handle the $ 5 million to $ 6 million account . 
The agency declined comment , but said it will continue work until a new agency is chosen . 
Ad Notes ... . 
NEW ACCOUNT 
: American Suzuki Motor Corp. , Brea , Calif. , awarded its estimated $ 10 million to $ 30 million account to Asher / Gould , Los Angeles . 
Also participating in the finals was Los Angeles agency Hakuhodo Advertising America . 
American Suzuki 's previous agency , Keye / Donna / Pearlstein , did n't participate . 
AYER TALKS : 
N W Ayer 's president and chief executive officer , Jerry J. Siano , said the agency is holding `` conversations '' about acquiring Zwiren Collins Karo & Trusk , a midsized Chicago agency , but a deal is n't yet close to being completed . 
WHO 'S NEWS : 
John Wells , 47 , former president and chief executive of N W Ayer 's Chicago office , was named management director and director of account services at WPP Group 's J. Walter Thompson agency in Chicago ... . 
Shelly Lazarus , 42 , was named president and chief operating officer of Ogilvy & Mather Direct , the direct mail division of WPP Group 's Ogilvy & Mather agency . 
Grand Metropolitan PLC , the United Kingdom food and beverage group that owns Pillsbury Inc. of the U.S. , announced a reshuffling of board-level executive duties intended to fit the company 's recent expansion . 
David Nash , formerly group finance director at Cadbury Schweppes PLC , will become Grand Met 's first group finance director in January . 
In a statement , Grand Met said its recent `` growth and wider geographic spread '' made it necessary to create the new position . 
The company also reassigned several executive responsibilities . 
David Tagg , formerly in charge of gambling operations , was appointed chief executive for retailing and property . 
Peter Cawdron , group strategy development director , and Bill Shardlow , group personnel director , will become part of the board 's management committee . 
David Baltimore , who has just been named president of Rockefeller University , already knows what it 's like to go through life with `` Nobel laureate '' appended to one 's name . 
He is currently experiencing what it 's like to have the phrase , `` under investigation for scientific fraud , '' also attached to his name . 
The Nobel committee made the first addition ; John Dingell 's congressional committee created the second . 
Both of Dr. Baltimore 's public faces have been on view the past few weeks while he was under consideration to succeed Joshua Lederberg as head of the prestigious Rockefeller research institution . 
It came to light that a substantial number of Rockefeller 's faculty were upset over or even opposed to Dr. Baltimore 's impending appointment . 
They were disturbed at what they regarded as Dr. Baltimore 's confrontational attitude toward the Dingell committee , which held hearings on a dispute over the lab notebooks of a researcher who had co-authored a scientific paper with Dr. Baltimore . 
Readers of these columns ( `` The Science Police , '' May 15 ) will recall that Dr. Baltimore was merely the most well-known part of the Dingell committee 's larger investigation , which touched MIT , Tufts , Duke , the National Institutes of Health and elsewhere . 
Rep. Dingell even managed to enlist the services of the Secret Service in his investigation of the Baltimore paper . 
Insofar as Mr. Dingell has a special interest in NIH and the institutions that receive its funding , the Rockefeller scientists were no doubt discomfited by Dr. Baltimore 's unflattering public opinion of this congressional patron , whose behavior reminded Dr. Baltimore of the McCarthy era . 
This well may be the first time that the venerable Rockefeller University has brushed up publicly against the intimidations now common in American science . 
John Dingell demagogues a David Baltimore , animal-rights activists do $ 3.5 million of damage to labs at the U.Cal-Davis , Meryl Streep decries the horrors of chemistry on talk shows , Jeremy Rifkin files lawsuits in federal court to thwart biotech experiments , and Dutch-elm-disease researcher Gary Strobel 's own colleagues at Montana State denounce him for `` violating '' EPA rules . 
Scientists are mistaken who still think that the anti-science movement in this country is n't their concern or that a David Baltimore could have somehow placated a John Dingell . 
( Mr. Dingell , by the way , has decreed another NIH investigation of the Baltimore paper , adding to several previous investigations . 
Something other than what most scientists would recognize as the truth is being sought here . ) 
Fortunately , there are signs that increasing numbers of scientists understand the necessity of speaking out . 
David Hubel , a Nobel laureate at Harvard , has taken the lead in defending research with animals , as has Dr. Michael DeBakey . 
NASA defended itself vigorously and successfully against a Rifkin suit to block the Galileo launch . 
Scientists need to understand that while they tend to believe their work is primarly about establishing new knowledge or doing good , today it is also about power . 
In a media-linked world , scientists may earn wide praise and even Nobels for their work , but they also attract the attention of people who wish to gain control over the content , funding and goals of that work . 
When a David Baltimore -- or the next target -- decides it is better to stand up to these forces , his fellow scientists would do well to recognize what is fundamentally at stake , and offer their public support . 
Wisconsin Toy Co. said it definitively agreed to acquire closely held Everything 's a Dollar Inc. of Virginia Beach , Va. , for stock currently valued at about $ 4.7 million . 
The Milwaukee toy retailer said the agreement calls for Everything 's a Dollar holders to receive for their holdings a total of 354,600 newly issued Wisconsin Toy shares . 
Wisconsin Toy currently has about 4.7 million shares outstanding . 
A company official said Arthur Borie , until January chief operating officer of Pic 'N Save Inc. , will buy a 20 % stake in the new Wisconsin Toy subsidiary , and will act as head of Everything 's a Dollar . 
Wisconsin Toy has 71 retail stores , primarily in discount settings . 
Everything 's a Dollar operates 60 specialty-retail stores . 
While welcoming Nicholas McInnes 's Sept. 18 letter offering corrections to your `` World-Wide Tax Revolution '' table ( editorial page , Aug. 29 ) , I am surprised that he neglected other errors that , for some of us , strike close to home . 
As a Channel Islander , I was amazed to see my birthplace listed as one of `` 86 countries with an income tax . '' 
Despite a history of heated local debate on the topic , my passport clearly reads `` British citizen . '' 
Whether Mr. McInnes 's oversight is merely a sign of a mainlander 's benign neglect is a question my fellow Channel Islanders ( and friends on the Isle of Man ) will continue to ponder . 
Patrick Basham 
Roland J. Hawkins , chairman of Jet Vacations Inc. , was elected to the board of this cruise line . 
The board expands to seven members . 
Ducks . 
If the White House spots one , it intends to fire a veto at it . 
Ducks are this season 's word for new taxes , under OMB Director Richard Darman 's formulation that `` if it looks like a duck , walks like a duck and quacks like a duck , it 's a duck . '' 
George Bush is quite clear : No new ducks . 
But what about all those non-duck ducks flapping over Washington ? 
We see a whole flock of programs that will impose significant costs on the American economy in the form of burdensome regulation and higher liabilities . 
Federal child care ( quack ) . 
The Clean Air bill ( quack ) . 
The disabled-workers bill ( quack , quack ) . 
The Bush White House is breeding non-duck ducks the same way the Nixon White House did : It hops on an issue that is unopposable -- cleaner air , better treatment of the disabled , better child care . 
It comes up with a toned-down version of a Democratic proposal . 
The bill gets signed into law and then the administration watches helplessly , wondering where all the `` unexpected '' costs came from . 
Consider , for instance , the very fat fowl known as federalized child care . 
The President came up with a good bill , but now may end up signing the awful bureaucratic creature hatched on Capitol Hill . 
It would create 38,000 local day-care commissions , answerable to the Department of Health and Human Services . 
They 'd determine where parents could store their kids during the day , and they 'd regulate the storage facilities . 
The initial costs are said to be in the $ 2 billion a year range , but that 's only the beginning . 
New entitlements tend to grow , creating a rationale for new taxes . 
Quack . 
The administration claims that its Clean Air bill will cost businesses between $ 14 billion and $ 19 billion annually , but economist Michael Evans estimates that the costs for firms will actually be in the $ 60 billion a year range . 
The House bill also distorts economic efficiency in all sorts of perverse ways . 
For example , the administration proposal imposes extremely tough emissions standards on new power plants . 
So instead of building more efficient modern plants , utilities stick scrubbers on the old plants . 
The money spent on scrubbers is diverted from planned research on new , cleaner technology . 
The bill also imposes the California auto-emissions standards on all cars nationwide , as if a car registered in Big Sky , Montana , needed to be as clean as one driven in Los Angeles . 
Proponents of the nationwide standards say the cost for car buyers would be about $ 500 per car . 
Other analysts say that estimate is low . 
Quack . 
Nobody knows how many billions of dollars the Americans With Disabilities Act will cost , because nobody knows what the bill entails . 
It is an intentionally vague document that will create a wave of litigation . 
Judges will write the real bill as suits roll through the courts . 
Lawyers will benefit . 
Private companies , and ultimately their customers , will end up footing the huge bill . 
The effect of Nixon era non-duck ducks was an economy clogged up with regulations and distortions . 
All this was recognized and documented in the succeeding years by economists , some of whom worked in the Reagan administration to lift this burden from the American people , states and local governments . 
Running for President in 1980 and 1988 , George Bush also persuasively diagnosed the economic stagnation of the 1970s . 
In fact , during last year 's campaign , the entire nation constantly heard Mr. Bush tout his accomplishments as head of the Task Force on Regulatory Relief . 
`` Government continues to inhibit the productivity of our citizenry and the international competitiveness of American business , '' the vice president declared when he was head of the task force . 
But with the impending passage of these new programs , Mr. Bush will surely be sending many people hurtling back into the regulatory thicket that he had helped cut back . 
By 1986 , the number of federal regulators was down to about 103,000 . 
Then it turned up , and by one estimate the number will be up to about 109,000 regulators by next year . 
Holding the dam on taxes is the most important task of the Bush presidency . 
We would have thought by now , though , that there was a significant core of people involved in government life who understood that direct taxation is n't the only way to slow down an economy . 
It is merely the most obvious . 
What is even more ironic is that all over the world nations are learning that well-intentioned public programs often backfire . 
But while they are unloading these burdens , the United States is close to creating three more big ones . 
The Bush administration ought to be setting aside some of its buckshot for the non-duck ducks . 
Confidence in the pound is widely expected to take another sharp dive if trade figures for September , due for release tomorrow , fail to show a substantial improvement from July and August 's near-record deficits . 
Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson 's restated commitment to a firm monetary policy has helped to prevent a freefall in sterling over the past week . 
But analysts reckon underlying support for sterling has been eroded by the chancellor 's failure to announce any new policy measures in his Mansion House speech last Thursday . 
This has increased the risk of the government being forced to increase base rates to 16 % from their current 15 % level to defend the pound , economists and foreign exchange market analysts say . 
`` The risks for sterling of a bad trade figure are very heavily on the down side , '' said Chris Dillow , senior U.K. economist at Nomura Research Institute . 
`` If there is another bad trade number , there could be an awful lot of pressure , '' noted Simon Briscoe , U.K. economist for Midland Montagu , a unit of Midland Bank PLC . 
Forecasts for the trade figures range widely , but few economists expect the data to show a very marked improvement from the # 2 billion ( $ 3.2 billion ) deficit in the current account reported for August . 
The August deficit and the # 2.2 billion gap registered in July are topped only by the # 2.3 billion deficit of October 1988 . 
Sanjay Joshi , European economist at Baring Brothers & Co. , said there is no sign that Britain 's manufacturing industry is transforming itself to boost exports . 
At the same time , he remains fairly pessimistic about the outlook for imports , given continued high consumer and capital goods inflows . 
He reckons the current account deficit will narrow to only # 1.8 billion in September . 
However , Mr. Dillow said he believes that a reduction in raw material stockbuilding by industry could lead to a sharp drop in imports . 
Combined with at least some rebound in exports after August 's unexpected decline , the deficit could narrow to as little as # 1.3 billion . 
Mr. Briscoe , who also forecasts a # 1.3 billion current account gap , warns that even if the trade figures are bullish for sterling , the currency wo n't advance much because investors will want to see further evidence of the turnaround before adjusting positions . 
Nevertheless , he noted , `` No one will want to go into the trade figures without a flat position '' in the pound . 
Meanwhile , overall evidence on the economy remains fairly clouded . 
In his Mansion House speech , Mr. Lawson warned that a further slowdown can be expected as the impact of the last rise in interest rates earlier this month takes effect . 
U.K. base rates are at their highest level in eight years . 
But consumer expenditure data released Friday do n't suggest that the U.K. economy is slowing that quickly . 
The figures show that spending rose 0.1 % in the third quarter from the second quarter and was up 3.8 % from a year ago . 
This compares with a 1.6 % rise in the second from the first quarter and a 5.4 % increase from the second quarter of 1988 . 
Mr. Dillow said the data show the economy `` is still quite strong , '' but suggestions that much of the spending went on services rather than consumer goods should reduce fears of more import rises . 
Certainly , the chancellor has made it clear that he is prepared to increase interest rates again if necessary to both ensure that a substantial slowdown does take place and that sterling does n't decline further . 
Thursday , he reminded his audience that the government `` can not allow the necessary rigor of monetary policy to be undermined by exchange rate weakness . '' 
Analysts agree there is little holding sterling firm at the moment other than Mr. Lawson 's promise that rates will be pushed higher if necessary . 
And , they warn , any further drop in the government 's popularity could swiftly make this promise sound hollow . 
Sterling was already showing some signs of a lack of confidence in Mr. Lawson 's promise Friday . 
In European trading it declined to $ 1.5890 and 2.9495 marks from $ 1.5940 and 2.9429 marks late Thursday . 
Economists suggested that if the pound falls much below 2.90 marks , the government will be forced to increase rates to 16 % , both to halt any further decline and ensure that the balance of monetary policy remains unchanged . 
Friday 's Market Activity 
The dollar posted gains in quiet trading as concerns about equities abated . 
Foreign exchange dealers said that the currency market has begun to distance itself from the volatile stock exchange , which has preoccupied the market since Oct. 13 , when the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged more than 190 points . 
Currency analysts predict that in the coming week the foreign exchange market will shift its focus back to economic fundamentals , keeping a close eye out for any signs of monetary easing by U.S. Federal Reserve . 
Late in the New York trading day , the dollar was quoted at 1.8578 marks , up from 1.8470 marks late Thursday in New York . 
The U.S. currency was also changing hands at 142.43 yen , up from 141.70 yen in New York late Thursday . 
In Tokyo on Monday , the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.95 yen , up from Friday 's Tokyo close of 141.35 yen . 
On the Commodity Exchange in New York , gold for current delivery settled at $ 367.30 an ounce , up 20 cents . 
Estimated volume was a light 2.4 million ounces . 
In early trading in Hong Kong Monday , gold was quoted at $ 366.50 an ounce . 
East Rock Partners Limited Partnership said it proposed to acquire A.P. Green Industries Inc. for $ 40 a share . 
In an Oct. 19 letter to A.P. Green 's board , East Rock said the offer is subject to the signing of a merger agreement by no later than Oct. 31 . 
The letter , attached to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission , said the approval is also contingent upon obtaining satisfactory financing . 
An A.P. Green official declined to comment on the filing . 
The $ 40-a-share proposal values the company at about $ 106.6 million . 
A.P. Green currently has 2,664,098 shares outstanding . 
Its stock closed at $ 38 , up $ 1.875 , in national over-the-counter trading . 
The company is a Mexico , Mo. , maker of refractory products . 
East Rock also said in the filing that it boosted its stake in A.P. Green to 8.7 % . 
It now holds 233,000 A.P. Green common shares , including 30,000 shares bought last Thursday for $ 35.50 to $ 36.50 a share . 
New York-based John Kuhns and Robert MacDonald control East Rock Partners Inc. , the sole general partner of East Rock Partners L.P . 
The sole limited partner of the partnership is Westwood Brick Lime Inc. , an indirect subsidiary of Westwood Group Inc . 
Both Westwood Brick and Westwood Group are based in Boston . 
Freight rates , declining for most of the decade because of competition spurred by deregulation , are bottoming out , turning upward and threatening to fuel inflation . 
Trucking , shipping and air-freight companies have announced rate increases , scheduled for this fall or early next year , reflecting higher costs and tightened demand for freight transport . 
Major shippers say they expect freight rates to rise at least as fast as inflation and maybe faster in the next few years . 
That 's a big change from recent years when freight haulage was a bright spot for U.S. productivity , helping to restrain inflation and make U.S. industry more competitive abroad . 
`` Demand has caught up with the supply of certain types of freight transportation , and rates are starting to move up '' at a rate `` close to or slightly more than the inflation rate , '' said Clifford Sayre , director of logistics at Du Pont Co . 
Shippers surveyed recently by Ohio State University said they expect their freight-transport , storage and distribution costs to rise about 4 % this year . 
Only 10 % of the 250 shippers polled expected their freight-transport costs to decrease , compared with 30 % who had looked to freight transport to reduce costs in past years . 
`` This is the first year since transportation deregulation in 1980 that we have had such a dramatic and broad-based upturn in perceived transportation rates , '' said Bernard LaLonde , a transportation logistics professor at Ohio State in Columbus . 
The deregulation of railroads and trucking companies that began in 1980 enabled shippers to bargain for transportation . 
Carriers could use their equipment more efficiently , leading to overcapacity they were eager to fill . 
Shippers cut about $ 35 billion from their annual , inter-city truck and rail costs , to about $ 150 billion , or about 6.4 % of gross national product , down from 8 % of GNP in 1981 . 
But with much of the inefficiency squeezed out of the freight-transport system , rising costs are likely to be reflected directly in higher freight rates . 
`` Shippers are saying ` the party 's over , ' '' said Mr. LaLonde . 
`` Shippers wo n't be able to look for transportation-cost savings as they have for the last eight or nine years . 
Transport rates wo n't be an opportunity for offsetting cost increases in other segments of the economy . '' 
Robert Delaney , a consultant at Arthur D. Little Inc. , Cambridge , Mass. , said `` We 've gotten all the benefits of deregulation in freight-cost reductions . 
Now we are starting to see real freight-rate increases as carriers replace equipment , pay higher fuel costs and pay more for labor . 
You 'll see carriers try to recoup some of the price cutting that occurred previously . '' 
Not everyone believes that the good times are over for shippers . 
`` There 's still a lot of pressure on rates in both rail and truck , '' said Gerard McCullough , lecturer in transportation at Massachusetts Institute of Technology . 
Less-than-truckload companies , which carry the freight of several shippers in each truck trailer , discounted away a 4.7 % rate increase implemented last April . 
The carriers were competing fiercely for market share . 
Railroad-rate increases are likely to be restrained by weakening rail-traffic levels and keen competition for freight from trucks . 
An official at Consolidated Freightways Inc. , a Menlo Park , Calif. , less-than-truckload carrier , said rate discounting in that industry has begun to `` stabilize . '' 
Consolidated Freightways plans to raise its rates 5.3 % late this year or early next year , and at least two competitors have announced similar increases . 
Truckers are `` trying to send signals that they need to stop the bloodletting , forget about market share and go for higher rates , '' said Michael Lloyd , an analyst at Salomon Bros . 
And `` shippers are getting the feeling that they have played one trucker off against another as much as they can , '' he said . 
Air-freight carriers raised their rates for U.S. products going across the Pacific to Asia by about 20 % earlier this month . 
And Japan Air Lines said it plans to boost its rates a further 25 % over the next two years . 
Such rate increases `` will increase the total cost of U.S. products and slow down the rate of increase of U.S. exports , '' said Richard Connors , a senior vice president of Yusen Air & Sea Service U.S.A. Inc. , the U.S. air-freight-forwarding subsidiary of Nippon Yusen Kaisha of Japan . 
Ship companies carrying bulk commodities , such as oil , grain , coal and iron ore , have been able to increase their rates in the last couple of years . 
Some bulk shipping rates have increased `` 3 % to 4 % in the past few months , '' said Salomon 's Mr. Lloyd . 
And ship lines carrying containers are also trying to raise their rates . 
Carriers boosted rates more than 10 % in the North Atlantic between the U.S. and Europe last September , hoping to partly restore rates to earlier levels . 
Ship lines operating in the Pacific plan to raise rates on containers carrying U.S. exports to Asia about 10 % , effective next April . 
MGM Grand Inc. said it filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a public offering of six million common shares . 
The Beverly Hills , Calif.-based company said it would have 26.9 million common shares outstanding after the offering . 
The hotel and Gaming company said Merrill Lynch Capital Markets will lead the underwriters . 
Proceeds from the sale will be used for remodeling and refurbishing projects , as well as for the planned MGM Grand hotel / casino and theme park . 
Bob Stone stewed over a letter from his manager putting him on probation for insubordination . 
Mr. Stone thought the discipline was unfair ; he believed that his manager wanted to get rid of him for personal reasons . 
Unable to persuade the manager to change his decision , he went to a `` company court '' for a hearing . 
At the scheduled time , Mr. Stone entered a conference room in a building near where he worked . 
After the three members of the court introduced themselves , the chairman of the panel said : `` Go ahead and tell us what happened . 
We may ask questions as you go along , or we may wait until the end . '' 
No lawyers or tape recorders were present . 
The only extra people were a couple of personnel specialists , one of whom knew Mr. Stone 's case intimately and would help fill in any facts needed to give the court the full picture . 
Over a cup of coffee , Mr. Stone told his story . 
He talked about 20 minutes . 
When he was through , the court members asked many questions , then the chairman said they would like to hear his manager 's side and talk to witnesses . 
The chairman promised Mr. Stone a decision within two weeks . 
Bob Stone is a fictional name , but the incident described is real . 
It happened at Northrop Corp. in Los Angeles . 
The court is called the Management Appeals Committee , or just `` MAC , '' and it is likely to hear a couple of dozen cases a year . 
Alter some details of this example and it could be taking place today at Federal Express in Memphis , the Defense and Underseas Systems divisions of Honeywell in Minneapolis , a General Electric plant in Columbia , Md. , or a number of other companies . 
These firms are pioneers in a significant new trend in the corporate world : the rise of what I call corporate due process . 
Although corporate due process is practiced today in few companies -- perhaps 40 to 60 -- it is one of the fastest developing trends in industry . 
In the coming decade a majority of people-oriented companies are likely to adopt it . 
Corporate due process appeals to management for a variety of reasons . 
It reduces lawsuits from disgruntled employees and ex-employees , with all that means for reduced legal costs and better public relations . 
It helps to keep out unions . 
It increases employee commitment to the company , with all that means for efficiency and quality control . 
What must your management team do to establish corporate due process ? 
Here are four key steps : 
1 . Make sure you have a strong personnel department . 
It must be able to handle most of the complaints that can not be solved in the trenches by managers and their subordinates , else the company court or adjudicators will be inundated with cases . 
At Polaroid , the Personnel Policy Planning Committee may hear only about 20 cases a year ; the rest of the many hundreds of complaints are resolved at earlier stages . 
At TWA , the System Board of Adjustment hears 50 to 75 cases a year , only a fraction of the complaints brought to personnel specialists . 
At Citicorp , the Problem Review Board may hear only 12 or so cases because of personnel 's skill in complaint-resolution . 
In a typical year , up to 20 % of the work force goes to personnel specialists with complaints of unfair treatment . 
In a large company that means many hundreds of complaints for personnel to handle . 
2 . Formally or informally , train all your managers and supervisors in the company 's due-process approach . 
See that they know company personnel policy backwards and forwards , for it is the `` law '' governing company courts and adjudicators . 
Coach them in handling complaints so that they can resolve problems immediately . 
In case managers and personnel specialists are unsuccessful and subordinates take their complaints to a company court or adjudicator , teach managers to accept reversals as a fact of business life , for in a good due-process system they are bound to happen . 
In the 15 companies I studied , reversal rates range on the average from 20 % to 40 % . 
3 . Decide whether you want a panel system or a single adjudicator . 
A panel system like that in the Bob Stone example enjoys such advantages as high credibility and , for the panelists , mutual support . 
An adjudicator system -- that is , an investigator who acts first as a fact-finder and then switches hats and arbitrates the facts -- has such advantages as speed , flexibility and maximum privacy . 
International Business Machines and Bank of America are among the companies using the single-adjudicator approach . 
4 . Make your due-process system visible . 
It wo n't do any good for anybody unless employees know about it . 
Most managements hesitate to go all out in advertising their due-process systems for fear of encouraging cranks and chronic soreheads to file complaints . 
On the other hand , they make sure at a minimum that their systems are described in their employee handbooks and talked up by personnel specialists . 
Smith-Kline Beecham goes further and sometimes features its grievance procedure in closed-circuit TV programs . 
Naturally , one of the best ways to guarantee visibility for your due-process system is for top management to support it . 
At IBM , the company 's Open Door system is sometimes the subject of memorandums from the chief executive . 
Federal Express goes further in this respect than any company I know of with both Frederick Smith and James Barksdale , chief executive and chief operating officer , respectively , sitting in on the Appeals Board almost every Tuesday to decide cases . 
Mr. Ewing is a consultant based in Winchester , Mass. , and author of `` Justice on the Job : Resolving Grievances in the Nonunion Workplace '' ( Harvard Business School Press , 1989 ) . 
Tokyo stocks closed higher in active trading Friday , marking the fourth consecutive daily gain since Monday 's sharp fall . 
London shares closed moderately lower in thin trading . 
At Tokyo , the Nikkei index of 225 selected issues was up 112.16 points to 35486.38 . 
The index advanced 266.66 points Thursday . 
In early trading in Tokyo Monday , the Nikkei index rose 101.98 points to 35588.36 . 
Friday 's volume on the First Section was estimated at one billion shares , up from 862 million Thursday . 
Winners outpaced losers , 572 to 368 , while 181 issues remained unchanged . 
With investors relieved at the overnight gain in New York stocks , small-lot buying orders streamed into the market from early morning , making traders believe the market was back to normal . 
The Nikkei , which reached as high as 35611.38 right after the opening , surrendered part of its early advance toward the end of the day because of profit-taking . 
`` Investors , especially dealers , do n't want to hold a position over the weekend , '' a trader at Dai-ichi Securities said , adding , though , that the trading mood remained positive through the afternoon session . 
The Tokyo Stock Price Index ( Topix ) of all issues listed in the First Section , which gained 22.78 points Thursday , was up 14.06 points , or 0.53 % , at 2679.72 . 
The Second Section index , which rose 15.72 points Thursday , was up 11.88 points , or 0.32 % , to close at 3717.46 . 
Volume in the second section was estimated at 30 million shares , up from 28 million Thursday . 
In turmoil caused by the previous Friday 's plunge in New York stocks , the Nikkei marked a sharp 647.33-point fall Monday . 
But the Nikkei fell an overall 1.8 % in value that day compared with Wall Street 's far sharper 6.9 % drop on Oct. 13 . 
The Tokyo market 's resiliency helped participants to regain confidence gradually as they spent more time on analyzing factors that caused the Friday plunge and realized these problems were unique to New York stocks and not directly related to Tokyo . 
The Nikkei continued to gain for the rest of the week , adding 1017.69 points in four days -- more than erasing Monday 's losses . 
But further major advances on the Nikkei are n't foreseen this week by market observers . 
Investors are still waiting to see how the U.S. government will decide on interest rates and how the dollar will be stabilized . 
Some high-priced issues made a comeback Friday . 
Pioneer surged 450 yen ( $ 3.16 ) to 6,050 yen ( $ 42.60 ) . 
Kyocera advanced 80 yen to 5,440 . 
Fanuc gained 100 to 7,580 . 
Breweries attracted investors because of their land property holdings that could figure in development or other plans , traders said . 
Sapporo gained 80 to 1,920 and Kirin added 60 to 2,070 . 
Housings , constructions and pharmaceuticals continued to be bought following Thursday 's gains because of strong earnings outlooks . 
Daiwa House gained 50 to 2,660 . 
Misawa Homes was up 20 at 2,960 . 
Kajima advanced 40 to 2,120 and Ohbayashi added 50 to 1,730 . 
Fujisawa added 80 to 2,010 and Mochida advanced 230 to 4,400 . 
London share prices were influenced largely by declines on Wall Street and weakness in the British pound . 
The key Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index ended 10.2 points lower at 2179.1 , above its intraday low of 2176.9 , but off the day 's high of 2189 . 
The index finished 2.4 % under its close of 2233.9 the previous Friday , although it recouped some of the sharp losses staged early last week on the back of Wall Street 's fall . 
London was weak throughout Friday 's trading , however , on what dealers attributed to generally thin interest ahead of the weekend and this week 's potentially important U.K. trade figures for September . 
The FT-SE 100 largely remained within an 11-point range establshed within the first hour of trading before it eased to an intraday low late in the session when a flurry of program selling pushed Wall Street lower . 
The FT 30-share index closed 11.0 points lower at 1761.0 . 
Volume was extremely thin at 351.3 million shares , the lightest volume of the week and modestly under Thursday 's 387.4 million shares . 
Dealers said the day 's action was featureless outside some response to sterling 's early weakness against the mark , and fears that Wall Street might open lower after its strong leap forward Thursday . 
They added that market-makers were largely sidelined after aggressively supporting the market Thursday in their quest to cover internal shortages of FT-SE 100 shares . 
Interest may remain limited into tomorrow 's U.K. trade figures , which the market will be watching closely to see if there is any improvement after disappointing numbers in the previous two months . 
The key corporate news of the day was that British Airways decided to withdraw from a management-led bid for UAL Corp. , the parent of United Airlines . 
British Airways rose initially after announcing its withdrawal from the UAL deal . 
Dealers said they viewed the initial # 390-million ( $ 622 million ) outlay for a 15 % stake in the airline as a bit much . 
Its shares slid in late dealings to close a penny per share lower at 197 pence . 
The airline was the most active FT-SE 100 at 8.2 million shares traded . 
The next most active top-tier stock was B.A.T Industries , the target of Sir James Goldsmith 's # 13.4 billion bid . 
The company gained shareholder approval Thursday to restructure in a bid to fend off the hostile takeover . 
Sir James said Thursday night that his plans for the takeover had n't changed . 
B.A.T ended the day at 778 , down 5 , on turnover of 7.5 million shares . 
Dealers said it was hit by some profit-taking after gains since mid-week . 
In other active shares , Trusthouse Forte shed 10 to 294 on volume of 6.4 million shares after a Barclays De Zoete Wedd downgrading , while Hillsdown Holdings , a food products concern , was boosted 2 to 271 after it disclosed it would seek shareholder approval to begin share repurchases . 
Elsewhere in Europe , share prices closed higher in Stockholm , Brussels and Milan . 
Prices were lower in Frankfurt , Zurich , Paris and Amsterdam . 
South African gold stocks closed moderately lower . 
Share prices closed higher in Sydney , Taipei , Wellington , Manila , Hong Kong and Singapore and were lower in Seoul . 
Here are price trends on the world 's major stock markets , as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective , Geneva . 
To make them directly comparable , each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100 . 
The percentage change is since year-end . 
The U.S. is required to notify foreign dictators if it knows of coup plans likely to endanger their lives , government officials said . 
The notification policy was part of a set of guidelines on handling coups outlined in a secret 1988 exchange of letters between the Reagan administration and the Senate Intelligence Committee . 
The existence of the guidelines has become known since President Bush disclosed them privately to seven Republican senators at a White House meeting last Monday . 
Officials familiar with the meeting said Mr. Bush cited the policy as an example of the sort of congressional requirements the administration contends contribute to the failure of such covert actions as this month 's futile effort to oust Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega . 
According to the officials , Mr. Bush even read to the senators selections from a highly classified letter from the committee to the White House discussing the guidelines . 
They said the president conceded the notification requirement did n't affect his decision to lend only minor support to this month 's Panama coup effort . 
No notification was ever considered , officials said , apparently because the U.S. did n't think the coup plotters intended to kill Mr. Noriega , but merely sought to imprison him . 
What 's more , both administration and congressional officials hint that the notification requirement is likely to be dropped from the guidelines on coup attempts that are being rewritten by the panel and the White House . 
The rewriting was launched at a meeting between Mr. Bush and intelligence committee leaders Oct. 12 , a few days before the meeting at which the president complained about the rules . 
However , the disclosure of the guidelines , first reported last night by NBC News , is already being interpreted on Capitol Hill as an unfair effort to pressure Congress . 
It has reopened the bitter wrangling between the White House and Congress over who is responsible for the failure to oust Mr. Noriega and , more broadly , for difficulties in carrying out covert activities abroad . 
A statement issued by the office of the committee chairman , Sen. David Boren ( D. , Okla. ) , charged that the disclosure is part of a continuing effort to shift the criticism for the failure of the recent coup attempt in Panama . 
The statement added , `` Someone has regrettably chosen to selectively summarize portions of highly classified correspondence between the two branches of government . 
Not only does this come close to a violation of law , it violates the trust we have all worked to develop . '' 
Sen. Boren said , `` It 's time to stop bickering and work together to develop a clear and appropriate policy to help the country in the future . 
I 've invited the president to send his suggestions to the committee . '' 
Republican Sen. William Cohen of Maine , the panel 's vice chairman , said of the disclosure that `` a text torn out of context is a pretext , and it is unfair for those in the White House who are leaking to present the evidence in a selective fashion . '' 
Sen. Boren said the committee could n't defend itself by making the documents public because that would violate classification rules . 
But the chairman and other committee members stressed that the notification guideline was n't imposed on the White House by a meddling Congress . 
Instead , both congressional and administration officials agreed , it grew out of talks about coup-planning in Panama that were initiated by the administration in July 1988 and stretched into last October . 
The guideline was n't a law , but a joint interpretation of how the U.S. might operate during foreign coups in light of the longstanding presidential order banning a U.S. role in assassinations . 
In fact , yesterday the administration and Congress were still differing on what had been agreed to . 
One administration official said notification was required even if the U.S. `` gets wind '' of somebody else 's coup plans that seem likely to endanger a dictator 's life . 
But a congressional source close to the panel said the rule only covered coup plans directly involving the U.S. . 
Although the notification guideline was n't carried out in this month 's coup attempt , some administration officials argue that it may have led to hesitation and uncertainty on the part of U.S. intelligence and military operatives in Panama . 
One senior administration official called the guideline `` outrageous '' and said it could make U.S. operatives reluctant to even listen to coup plans for fear they may get into legal trouble . 
The issue came to a head last year , officials recalled , partly because the Reagan administration had sought unsuccessfully to win committee approval of funding for new Panama coup efforts . 
In addition , both administration and congressional officials said the need for guidelines on coups and assassinations was partly spurred by a White House desire to avoid nasty overseas surprises during the election campaign . 
Though the assassination ban is a White House order that Congress never voted on , the intelligence committees can exercise influence over its interpretation . 
Last week , Central Intelligence Agency Director William Webster publicly called on Congress to provide new interpretations of the assassination order that would permit the U.S. more freedom to act in coups . 
The administration has reacted to criticism that it mishandled the latest coup attempt by seeking to blame Congress for restrictions the White House said have hampered its freedom of action . 
However , last week Mr. Webster 's two top CIA deputies said congressional curbs had n't hampered the spy agency 's role in the coup attempt in Panama . 
Nevertheless , the administration 's criticisms appeared to have made some headway with Sens. Boren and Cohen after their Oct. 12 meeting with the president . 
The three men agreed to rewrite the guidelines , without changing the basic assassination ban , to clear up any ambiguities that may have hampered U.S. encouragement of coups against anti-American leaders . 
The new argument over the notification guideline , however , could sour any atmosphere of cooperation that existed . 
Gerald F. Seib contributed to this article . 
( During its centennial year , The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history . ) 
MUTUAL FUNDS ARRIVED IN THE U.S. during the Roaring Twenties ( they had been in Britain for a century ) , but they did n't boom until the money market fund was created in the 1970s . 
By 1980 , there were more than 100 such funds . 
Besides creating a vehicle for investors , money market funds also helped rewrite banking regulations . 
The idea was to let small investors , the backbone of the fund business , deal in the money market 's high short-term interest rates . 
This had been the exclusive province of those rich enough to use six-figure sums to get income that was figured beyond the third or fourth decimal place . 
The now-standard price of $ 1 a share came about by accident . 
An early fund had filed a registration with the Securities and Exchange Commission that included a fixed $ 1 price . 
It arrived just as the regulator handling such operations was retiring . 
His successor approved the $ 1 price in the process of clearing the backed-up papers on his desk . 
When Dreyfus started the first advertising-backed retail fund in February 1974 , it was priced at $ 10 a share ( and reached $ 1 billion in assets in one year . ) 
Dreyfus moved to the $ 1 price after the SEC set standards -- an average 120-day maturity of high-grade paper -- that are still the rule . 
Keeping the listed price at a dollar is primarily a convenience . 
Actually , the funds do fluctuate , but beyond the third decimal place . 
Rounding-off keeps them at $ 1 . 
Eventually , the money funds ' success forced relaxation of curbs on bank interest rates to allow banks to offer competing yields . 
The new instrument also introduced many to the industry -- 30 % of fund owners ( there are more than 54 million accounts ) started with a money fund . 
Today more than 470 money market funds have total assets exceeding $ 350 billion . 
( The companion tax-exempt funds add $ 71 billion . ) 
Dreyfus alone has seen its money market funds grow from $ 1 billion in 1975 to closes to $ 15 billion today . 
Procter & Gamble Co. and Noxell Corp. said they received early termination of the waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act regarding the proposed $ 1.4 billion merger of Noxell into P&G . 
Shareholders of Noxell , of Hunt Valley , Md. , will vote on the merger at a special meeting on Nov. 30 , the companies said . 
P&G , Cincinnati , agreed to exchange 0.272 share of its common stock for each share of Noxell common and Class B stock , a total of about 11 million P&G shares . 
The transaction would mark the entry of P&G into cosmetics . 
The company already markets a wide range of detergents , food , household and health-care products . 
Shareholders of Messerschmitt-Boelkow-Blohm G.m.b . H. postponed their formal endorsement of a merger with Daimler-Benz AG until another meeting on Nov. 17 . 
The owners of the defense and aerospace concern , which include three regional states , several industrial companies and banks , met Friday to discuss the final terms of the transaction , in which Daimler-Benz will acquire 50.01 % of 
But agreement aparently could n't be reached because of opposition from the states of Hamburg and Bremen , which are demanding more influence over the German Airbus operations and a better guarantee against job losses in the troubled Northern German region . 
The two states and the state of Bavaria still hold a majority in MBB , but their stake will fall to around 30 % after Daimler-Benz acquires its stake in the concern . 
Jeffrey E. Levin was named vice president and chief economist of this commodity futures and options exchange . 
He had been associate professor in the department of finance at Seton Hall University . 
SIERRA TUCSON Cos. said it completed its initial public offering of 2.5 million common shares , which raised $ 30 million . 
The Tucson , Ariz. , operator of addiction-treatment centers said proceeds will be used for expansion , to pay debt and for general corporate purposes . 
Oppenheimer & Co. was the lead underwriter . 
The government issues its first reading on third-quarter real gross national product this week in a report that is expected to disclose much tamer inflation . 
The consensus view on real GNP , the total value of the nation 's output of goods and services adjusted for inflation , calls for a 2.3 % gain , down from the second quarter 's 2.5 % , according to MMS International , a unit of McGraw-Hill Inc. , New York . 
But inflation , as measured by the GNP deflator in Thursday 's report , is expected to rise only 3.5 % , down from 4.6 % in the second quarter . 
`` Inflation could be a real surprise , '' said Samuel D. Kahan , chief financial economist at Kleinwort Benson Government Securities Inc. , in Chicago . 
`` If that gets people excited , it could serve as an impetus to the fixed-income markets to lower their rates , '' he added . 
The week 's other notable indicators include mid-October auto sales , September durable goods orders as well as September personal income , personal consumption and the saving rate . 
Most are expected to fall below previous-month levels . 
Many economists see even slower GNP growth for the remainder of the year , with some leaning more strongly toward a possible recession . 
In addition to softer production data , weaker housing starts and lower corporate profits currently in evidence , some analysts believe the two recent natural disasters -- Hurricane Hugo and the San Francisco earthquake -- will carry economic ramifications in the fourth quarter . 
The recent one-day , 190-point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average seems to be significant to economists mainly for its tacit comment on the poor quality of third-quarter profits now being reported . 
`` The stock market is sick because profits are crumbling , '' says Michael K. Evans , president of Evans Economics Inc. , Washington . 
The economy , he noted , moves the market , not vice versa . 
On the other hand , Mr. Evans expects the hurricane and the earthquake `` to take a hunk out of fourth-quarter GNP . '' 
His estimate of 3.3 % for third-quarter GNP is higher than the consensus largely because he believes current inventories are n't as low as official figures indicate . 
Demand , he believes , is being met from overhang rather than new production . 
By and large , economists believe the two natural catastrophes will limit economic damage to their regions . 
Edward J. Campbell , economist at Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. , New York , noted that large increases in construction activity along with government and private relief efforts could offset loss of production in those areas . 
Gary Ciminero , economist at Fleet / Norstar Financial Group , Providence , R.I. , expects the deflator to rise 3.7 % , well below the second quarter 's 4.6 % , partly because of what he believes will be temporarily better price behavior . 
He expects real GNP growth of only 2.1 % for the quarter , noting a wider trade deficit , slower capital and government spending and the lower inventory figures . 
Sung Won Sohn , chief economist at Norwest Corp. , Minneapolis , holds that the recent stock-market volatility `` increases the possibility of economic recession and reinforces the bad news '' from recent trade deficit , employment and housing reports . 
The consensus calls for a 0.5 % increase in September personal income and a 0.3 % gain in consumption . 
In August , personal income rose 0.4 % and personal consumption increased 0.9 % . 
Charles Lieberman , managing director of financial markets reasearch at Manufacturers Hanover Securities Corp. , New York , said Hurrican Hugo shaved 0.1 % to 0.2 % from personal-income growth , because of greatly diminished rental income from tourism . 
Durable goods orders for September , due out tomorrow , are expected to show a slip of 1 % , compared with August 's 3.9 % increase . 
As usual , estimates on the fickle report are wide , running from a drop of 3.5 % to a gain of 1.6 % . 
HASTINGS MANUFACTURING Co. declared a regular quarterly dividend of 10 cents a share and an extra dividend of five cents a share on its common stock , payable Dec. 15 to shares of record Nov. 17 . 
This is the 11th consecutive quarter in which the company has paid shareholders an extra dividend of five cents . 
The Hastings , Mich. , concern makes piston rings , filters and fuel pumps . 
Vickers PLC , a United Kingdom defense and engineering company , said an investment unit controlled by New Zealand financier Ron Brierley raised its stake in the company Friday to 15.02 % from about 14.6 % Thursday and from 13.7 % the previous week . 
I.E.P. Securities Ltd. , a unit of Mr. Brierley 's Hong Kong-based Industrial Equity ( Pacific ) Ltd. , boosted its holdings in Vickers to 38.8 million shares . 
The latest purchase follows small increases in his holdings made over the past five months . 
In May , Mr. Brierley 's stake shrank to 8.7 % after ranging between 9 % and 11 % for much of the previous year . 
`` Ron Brierley clearly views our company as a good investment , '' a Vickers spokesman said . 
The spokesman refused to comment on speculation that Industrial Equity might use its interest as a platform to launch a hostile bid for the company . 
Vickers makes tanks for the U.K. army , Rolls Royce cars , and has marine and medical businesses . 
When Rune Andersson set out to revive flagging Swedish conglomerate Trelleborg AB in the early 1980s , he spurned the advice of trendy management consultants . 
`` All these consultants kept coming around telling us we should concentrate on high technology , electronics or biotechnology , and get out of mature basic industries , '' Mr. Andersson recalls . 
Yet under its 45-year-old president , Trelleborg moved aggressively into those unfashionable base industries -- first strengthening its existing rubber and plastics division , later adding mining as well as building and construction materials . 
It was a gutsy move for a little-known executive , fired after only two months as president of his previous company . 
But going against the grain has never bothered Mr. Andersson . 
Stroking his trademark white goatee during a recent interview , the diminutive Swede quips : `` It turned out to be lucky for us . 
If the whole market thinks what you 're doing is crazy you do n't have much competition . '' 
Mr. Andersson is anxious to strengthen Trelleborg 's balance sheet . 
Characteristically , he did n't waste much time getting started . 
On Tuesday , Trelleborg 's directors announced plans to spin off two big divisions -- minerals processing , and building and distribution -- as separately quoted companies on Stockholm 's Stock Exchange . 
At current market prices , the twin public offerings to be completed next year would add an estimated 2.5 billion Swedish kronor ( $ 386 million ) to Trelleborg 's coffers , analysts say . 
The board had also been expected to approve a SKr1.5 billion international offering of new Trelleborg shares . 
But that share issue -- intended to make Trelleborg better known among international investors -- was postponed until market conditions stabilize , people familiar with the situation say . 
Trelleborg 's internationally traded `` Bfree '' series stock plunged SKr29 ( $ 4.48 ) to SKr205 ( $ 31.65 ) in volatile trading Monday in Stockholm . 
Tuesday , the shares regained SKr20 , closing at SKr225 . 
Mr. Andersson says he is confident that taking parts of the company public will help erase the `` conglomerate stigma '' that has held down Trelleborg 's share price . 
Trelleborg plans to remain the dominant shareholder with stakes of slightly less than 50 % of both units . 
The spinoff should solve a problem for the parent . 
A family foundation set up by late founder Henry Dunker controls 59 % of Trelleborg 's voting shares outstanding . 
But the foundation bylaws require the entire Trelleborg stake to be sold in the open market if control drops below 50 % . 
That possibility had crept closer as repeated new share offerings to finance Trelleborg 's rapid growth steadily diluted the foundation 's holding . 
That growth is the result of Mr. Andersson 's shopping spree , during which he has bought and sold more than 100 companies during the past five years . 
Most of the new additions were barely profitable , if not outright loss makers . 
Applying prowess gained during earlier stints at appliance maker AB Electrolux , Mr. Andersson and a handful of loyal lieutenants aggressively stripped away dead wood -- and got quick results . 
The treatment turned Trelleborg into one of Scandinavia 's biggest and fastest-growing industrial concerns . 
Between 1985 and 1988 , sales multipled more than 10 times and pretax profit surged almost twelvefold . 
Many analysts expect Mr. Andersson , who owns 1.7 % of the company , to be named Trelleborg 's new chairman when Ernst Herslow steps down next year . 
But the promotion is n't likely to alter a management style Mr. Andersson describes as `` being the driving force leading the troops , not managing by sitting back with a cigar waiting for people to bring me ideas . '' 
Last month , in his boldest move yet , Mr. Andersson and Trelleborg joined forces with Canada 's Noranda Inc. in a joint $ 2 billion hostile takeover of another big Canadian mining concern , Falconbridge Ltd . 
Industry analysts suggest that the conquest of Falconbridge could vault Trelleborg from a regional Scandinavian success story to a world-class mining concern . 
`` Trelleborg is n't in the same league yet as mining giants such as RTZ Corp. or Anglo-American Corp. , '' says Mike Kurtanjek , a mining analyst at James Capel & Co. , London . 
`` But we certainly like what we 've seen so far . '' 
But Trelleborg still must clear some tough hurdles . 
Mr. Andersson acknowledges that the company 's mining division `` will be busy for a while digesting its recent expansion . '' 
Booming metals prices have fueled Trelleborg 's recent profit surge , raising mining 's share of pretax profit to 68 % this year from a big loss two years earlier . 
But analysts caution an expected fall in metal prices next year could slow profit growth . 
Mining is likely to remain Trelleborg 's main business . 
Analysts say its chances of success will likely hinge on how well Trelleborg manages to cooperate with Noranda in the Falconbridge venture . 
Noranda and Trelleborg each came close to winning Falconbridge alone before the successful joint bid . 
Some analysts say Noranda would prefer to break up Falconbridge , and that the Swedes -- relatively inexperienced in international mining operations -- could have problems holding their own with a much bigger partner like Noranda operating on its home turf . 
Mr. Andersson insists that Trelleborg and Noranda have n't discussed a Falconbridge break-up . 
Falconbridge , he says , will continue operating in its current form . 
`` We 'd be reluctant to accept 50-50 ownership in a manufacturing company . 
But such partnerships are common in mining , where there are n't problems or conflict of interest or risk of cheating by a partner , '' Trelleborg 's president says . 
Perhaps more important , both companies share Mr. Andersson 's belief in the coming renaissance of base industries . 
`` If the 1980s were a decade of consumption , the '90s will be the investment decade , '' Mr. Andersson says . 
`` The whole of Europe and the industrialized world is suffering from a breakdown in infrastructure investment , '' he says . 
`` That 's beginning to change . 
And investment is the key word for base metals , and most other businesses Trelleborg is in . 
Apple Computer Inc. posted improved fiscal fourth-quarter profit due largely to a $ 48 million gain on the sale of its stock in Adobe Systems Inc . 
Excluding the gain , the company registered a modest 4.6 % increase for the quarter ended Sept. 29 to $ 113 million , or 87 cents a share , from the year-earlier $ 107.9 million , or 84 cents a share . 
Proceeds of the Adobe sale brought net income in the quarter to $ 161.1 million , or $ 1.24 a share . 
Apple shares fell 75 cents in over-the-counter trading to close at $ 48 a share . 
Fiscal fourth-quarter sales grew about 18 % to $ 1.38 billion from $ 1.17 billion a year earlier . 
Without the Adobe gain , Apple 's full-year operating profit edged up 1.5 % to $ 406 million , or $ 3.16 a share , from $ 400.3 million , or $ 3.08 a share . 
Including the Adobe gain , full-year net was $ 454 million , or $ 3.53 a share . 
Sales for the year rose nearly 30 % to $ 5.28 billion from $ 4.07 billion a year earlier . 
John Sculley , chairman and chief executive officer , credited the Macintosh SE / 30 and IIcx computers , introduced in the winter , for the brightened sales performance . 
Mr. Sculley also indicated that sagging margins , which dogged the company through most of 1989 , began to turn up in the fourth quarter as chip prices eased . 
`` Adverse pressure on gross margins ... has subsided , '' Mr. Sculley said . 
Margins in the fiscal fourth quarter perked up , rising to 51 % from 49.2 % a year earlier . 
For all of fiscal 1989 , however , the average gross margin was 49 % , below the average 1988 gross margin of 51 % . 
Lower component costs -- especially for DRAMs , or dynamic random access memory chips -- were cited for the easing of margin pressure on the company , a spokeswoman said . 
Looking ahead to 1990 , Mr. Sculley predicted `` another year of significant revenue growth , '' along with improved profitability , as the recovery in gross margins continues into 1990 . 
Gary J. Schantz , 44 years old , was named president and chief operating officer . 
Polymerix makes lumber-like materials that it describes as `` plastic wood . '' 
The operating chief 's post is new . 
Martin Schrager , 51 , who had been president , was named vice chairman . 
He remains chief executive officer . 
Mr. Schantz was vice president and chief operating officer of the Acrylic division of Polycast Technology Corp . 
Separately , the board expanded to six members with the election of David L. Holewinski , a consultant . 
The company also said it privately placed stock and warrants in exchange for $ 750,000 . 
Terry L. Haines , formerly general manager of Canadian operations , was elected to the new position of vice president , North American sales , of this plastics concern . 
Also , Larry A. Kushkin , executive vice president , North American operations , was named head of the company 's international automotive operations , another new position . 
He remains an executive vice president , the company said , and his new position reflects `` the growing importance of the world automotive market as a market for A. Schulman 's high performance plastic materials . '' 
Gordon Trimmer will succeed Mr. Haines as manager of Canadian operations , and Mr. Kushkin 's former position is n't being filled at this time , the company said . 
General Electric Co. said it signed a contract with the developers of the Ocean State Power project for the second phase of an independent $ 400 million power plant , which is being built in Burrillville , R.I . 
GE , along with a division of Ebasco , a subsidiary of Enserch Corp. , have been building the first 250-megawatt phase of the project , which they expect to complete in late 1990 . 
The second portion will be completed the following year . 
GE 's Power Generation subsidiary will operate and maintain the plant upon its completion . 
The Environmental Protection Agency is getting a lot out of the Superfund program . 
Of the $ 4.4 billion spent so far on the program , 60 % is going for administrative costs , management and research , the Office of Technology Assessment just reported . 
Only 36 of 1,200 priority cleanup sites have been `` decontaminated . '' 
Over the next 50 years , $ 500 billion is earmarked for the program . 
At current allocations , that means EPA will be spending $ 300 billion on itself . 
It may not be toxic , but we know where one waste dump is . 
Chambers Development Co. said its Security Bureau Inc. unit purchased two security concerns in Florida that will add $ 2.1 million of annual revenue . 
Purchase of the businesses serving Miami , Fort Lauderdale and West Palm Beach , Fla. , is part of a plan by Chambers to expand in the growing security industry . 
Terms were n't disclosed . 
Basf AG said it moved its headquarters for Latin America to Mexico and the headquarters for the Asia / Australia regional division to Singapore , effective Oct . 
The central offices for both regions were previously located in Ludwigshafen , Basf headquarters . 
The West German chemical concern called the moves a further step in the internationalization of its business activities . 
Both regions are the fastest-growing areas for Basf , the company said . 
David H. Eisenberg , 53 years old , was named president and chief operating officer of Imasco 's 500-store Peoples Drug Stores Inc. unit , based in Alexandria , Va . 
Mr. Eisenberg was senior executive vice president and chief operating officer . 
Imasco is a tobacco , retailing , restaurant and financial services concern . 
Lotus Development Corp. is in talks to sell its Signal stock-quote service to Infotechnology Inc. , the New York parent of Financial News Network , people familiar with the negotiations said . 
They said the price would be around $ 10 million . 
Signal , which has an estimated 10,000 subscribers and is profitable , provides stock quotes over an FM radio band that can be received by specially equipped personal computers . 
The computers will display stock prices selected by users . 
Lotus , Cambridge , Mass. , has been rumored to have the sale of the four-year-old unit under consideration for a year . 
The business is n't related to Lotus 's main businesses of making computer software and publishing information on compact disks . 
`` Please submit your offers , '' says Felipe Bince Jr . 
He surveys the prospective investors gathered in the board room of the Philippine government 's Asset Privatization Trust for the sale of a 36 % interest in the country 's largest paper mill . 
The agency expects the bids to be equivalent of more than $ 80 million . 
Not a peso is offered . 
Mr. Bince , the trust 's associate executive trustee , declares the bidding a failure . 
`` It 's getting harder to sell , '' he mutters as he leaves the room . 
Indeed . Recently , the trust failed to auction off the paper mill , a bank , an office building and a small cotton-ginning plant . 
Of the four , only the bank and the plant drew bids -- one apiece . 
In October 1987 , President Corazon Aquino vowed that her government would `` get out of business '' by selling all or part of the state 's holdings in the many companies taken over by the government during the 20-year rule of Ferdinand Marcos . 
Two years later , Mrs. Aquino 's promise remains largely unfulfilled . 
October is a critical month for the privatization program . 
Manila is offering several major assets for the first time and is trying to conclude sales already arranged . 
In addition , the government is scheduled to unveil plans for privatizing Philippine Airlines , the national carrier , an effort that lawyer and business columnist Rodolfo Romero calls `` the bellwether of privatization . '' 
All told , there are assets on the line valued at up to $ 1.03 billion . 
The privatization program is designed to rid the government of hundreds of assets and to raise critically needed funds . 
Much of the money from the sales is earmarked for a multibillion-dollar agrarian-reform program . 
But efforts have been thwarted by official indifference , bureaucratic resistance , a legal system that operates at a snail 's pace , political opposition and government misjudgments . 
Most recently , a lack of buyers has been added to the list . 
Rather than gathering momentum , the program is in danger of slowing even more as the government tackles several big assets . 
The axiom appears to be that the more valuable the asset , the harder the privatization process . 
`` You just do n't see a whole lot happening , '' says an international economist . 
To be sure , the program has n't completely stalled . 
The Asset Privatization Trust , the agency chiefly responsible for selling government-held properties , has recorded sales of more than $ 500 million since it began functioning in December 1986 . 
But its success has been largely in the sale of small , nonperforming companies , which are valued for their assets . 
Dealing with the sales this month could be particularly challenging because almost every problem that has hobbled the program in the past is popping up again . 
Ramon Garcia , the Asset Trust 's executive trustee , admits to what he calls `` temporary setbacks . '' 
In light of the poor results recently , he says , the agency is adopting an `` attitude of flexibility . '' 
October 's troubles began when the trust failed to sell a state-owned commercial bank , Associated Bank , for the minimum price of 671 million pesos ( $ 31 million ) . 
At the end of the month , the agency again will offer the bank . 
But instead of a minimum price , only a target price will be established . 
Bankers say , however , that the government may have difficulty selling the institution even without a floor price . 
The bank has a negative net worth , they say . 
In addition , special bidding rules give the bank 's former owner , Leonardo Ty , the right to match the highest bid . 
Mr. Ty lost control to the government in 1980 when a government bank made emergency loans to the cash-strapped institution . 
In 1983 , the loans were converted into equity , giving Manila 98 % of the bank , but with the understanding that Mr. Ty had repurchase rights . 
His ability to match any bid has scared off many potential buyers . 
Separately , the government will try again within a month to sell the 36 % stake in Paper Industries Corp. of the Philippines , or Picop , as the paper mill is known . 
The price will depend on how much Picop shares fetch on the local stock market . 
But according to bankers and stock analysts who have studied the paper mill , price is n't the only consideration . 
As it stands now , the government would continue to hold 45 % of Picop after the 36 % stake is sold . 
( About 7.5 % of Picop is publicly traded and other shareholders own the rest of the equity . ) 
Potential buyers , mostly foreign companies , are reluctant to take a non-controlling stake in a company that , by the government 's own reckoning , needs some $ 100 million in new capital for rehabilitation . 
The prospect of buying into a cash-hungry company without getting management control persuaded at least three foreign buyers , including a member of the Elders group of Australia , to pull out of the bidding , the bankers and analysts say . 
Mr. Garcia acknowledges the problem and says the Asset Trust will study why the bidding failed and what changes the agency may be able to offer . 
Under government regulations , however , foreign ownership of Picop 's equity is limited to 40 % . 
Even though the government would retain the 45 % stake in Picop , critics have accused the trust of selling out to foreigners . 
A series of newspaper articles accused the trust of short-changing the government over the Picop sale . 
Mr. Garcia says he has been notified of congressional hearings on the Picop bidding and possible legislation covering the paper mill 's sale , both prompted by the criticism of the agency . 
The question of control could further hinder long-delayed plans for the government to divest itself of Philippine Airlines , in which it has a 99 % stake . 
The carrier has valuable trans-Pacific and Asian routes but it remains debt-laden and poorly managed . 
This maker of electronic measuring devices named two new directors , increasing board membership to nine . 
The new directors are Gordon M. Sprenger , president and chief executive officer of LifeSpan Inc. , and Peter S. Willmott , chairman and chief executive officer of Willmott Services Inc . 
Gerard E. Wood , 51 years old , was elected president , chief executive officer and a director of this minerals and materials company . 
He succeeds Harry A. Durney , 65 , who is retiring from active duty but remains a director and consultant . 
Mr. Wood has been president and chief executive of Steep Rock Resources Inc . 
Eagle Financial Corp. and Webster Financial Corp. , two Connecticut savings bank-holding companies , agreed to merge in a tax-free stock transaction . 
The new holding company , Webster / Eagle Bancorp Inc. , will have about $ 1.2 billion of assets and 19 banking offices in Connecticut . 
Tangible capital will be about $ 115 million . 
The merger is subject to regulatory clearance and a definitive agreement . 
In the merger , each share of Webster , based in Waterbury , will be converted into one share of the new company . 
Each share of Eagle , based in Bristol , will become 0.95 share of Webster / Eagle . 
In American Stock Exchange composite trading Friday , Eagle shares rose 12.5 cents to $ 11 . 
In national over-the-counter trading , Webster shares fell 25 cents to $ 12.375 . 
Webster has 3.5 million shares outstanding and Eagle 2.6 million . 
Their indicated market values thus are about $ 43.3 million and $ 28.6 million , respectively . 
Frank J. Pascale , chairman of Eagle , will be chairman of the new firm and James C. Smith , president and chief executive officer of Webster , will take those posts at Webster / Eagle . 
Harold W. Smith Sr. , chairman of Webster , will become chairman emeritus and a director of the new company . 
Ralph T. Linsley , vice chairman of Eagle , will become vice chairman of Webster / Eagle . 
The board will be made up of seven directors of each holding company . 
In an interview , James Smith said the banks ' `` markets are contiguous and their business philosophies are similar and conservative . '' 
Nonperforming loans will make up only about 0.5 % of the combined banks ' total loans outstanding , he said . 
At June 30 , Webster , which owns First Federal Savings & Loan Association of Waterbury , had assets of $ 699 million . 
Eagle , which controls Bristol Federal Savings Bank and First Federal Savings & Loan Association of Torrington , had assets of $ 469.6 million on that date . 
Guillermo Ortiz 's Sept. 15 Americas column , `` Mexico 's Been Bitten by the Privatization Bug , '' is a refreshingly clear statement of his government 's commitment to privatization , and must be welcomed as such by all Americans who wish his country well . 
The Mexico-United States Institute is glad to see such a high official as Mexico 's undersecretary of finance view his country 's reforms `` in the context of a larger , world-wide process '' of profound change toward free-market economics , especially in the statist countries . 
Having said that , we must caution against an apparent tendency to overstate the case . 
It is not quite true , for example , that the Mexican government has `` privatized '' Mexicana de Aviacion , as Mr. Ortiz claims . 
In the same sentence he contradicts himself when he reports that the government still retains 40 % of the total equity of the airline . 
How can a company be considered `` privatized '' if the state is so heavily represented in it ? 
( True , the Mexican government has granted `` control '' over the airline to a new private consortium , but its propensity to take back what it gives is too well known to permit one to be sanguine . ) 
Regrettably , too , Mr. Ortiz resorts to the familiar `` numbers game '' when he boasts that `` fewer than 392 { state enterprises } currently remain in the public sector , '' down from the `` 1,155 public entities that existed in 1982 . 
'' But the enterprises still in state hands include the biggest and most economically powerful ones in Mexico ; indeed , they virtually constitute the economic infrastructure . 
I refer essentially to petroleum , electric power , banking and newsprint . 
Those enterprises , however , are not going to be privatized . 
They are officially considered `` strategic , '' and their privatization is prohibited by the Mexican Constitution . 
In language that sidesteps the issue , Mr. Ortiz writes , `` The divestiture of nonpriority and nonstrategic public enterprises is an essential element of President Carlos Salinas 's plan to modernize Mexico 's economy ... . '' 
Yet clearly , modernization must embrace its key industries before it can be said to have caught the `` privatization bug . '' 
The bottom line , however , is not economic but political reform . 
A long succession of Mexican presidents arbitrarily nationalized whatever industry they took a fancy to , without having to answer to the public . 
To guarantee that Mexicana de Aviacion and other companies will really be privatized , Mexico needs a pluri-party political system that will ensure democracy and hence accountability . 
Daniel James President Mexico-United States Institute 
The board of this Ponce , Puerto Rico concern voted to suspend payment of its quarterly of 11 cents a share for the third quarter . 
The third-largest thrift institution in Puerto Rico also said it expects a return to profitability in the third quarter when it reports operating results this week . 
Ponce Federal said the dividend was suspended in anticipation of more stringent capital requirements under the Financial Institutions Reform , Recovery , and Enforcement Act of 1989 . 
A labor-management group is preparing a revised buy-out bid for United Airlines parent UAL Corp. that would transfer majority ownership to employees while leaving some stock in public hands , according to people familiar with the group . 
The group has been discussing a proposal valued in a range of $ 225 to $ 240 a share , or $ 5.09 billion to $ 5.42 billion . 
But to avoid the risk of rejection , the group does n't plan to submit the plan formally at a UAL board meeting today . 
Instead , the group is raising the proposal informally to try to test the board 's reaction . 
People familiar with the company say the board is n't likely to give quick approval to any offer substantially below the $ 300-a-share , $ 6.79 billion buy-out bid that collapsed last week after banks would n't raise needed loans and after a key partner , British Airways PLC , dropped out . 
In composite trading Friday on the New York Stock Exchange , UAL closed at $ 168.50 a share , down $ 21.625 . 
But the pilots union , which has been pushing for a takeover since 1987 , appears to be pressing ahead with the revised bid to avoid further loss of momentum even though it has n't found a partner to replace British Air . 
Although the bidding group has n't had time to develop its latest idea fully or to discuss it with banks , it believes bank financing could be obtained . 
After the collapse of the last effort , the group does n't plan to make any formal proposal without binding commitments from banks covering the entire amount to be borrowed . 
Under the type of transaction being discussed , the pilot-management group would borrow several billion dollars from banks that could then be used to finance a cash payment to current holders . 
Those current holders would also receive minority interests in the new company . 
For example , the group could offer $ 200 a share in cash plus stock valued at $ 30 a share . 
UAL currently has 22.6 million shares , fully diluted . 
The new structure would be similar to a recapitalization in which holders get a special dividend yet retain a controlling ownership interest . 
The difference is that current holders would n't retain majority ownership or control . 
The failed takeover would have given UAL employees 75 % voting control of the nation 's second-largest airline , with management getting 10 % control and British Air 15 % . 
It was n't clear how the ownership would stack up under the new plan , but employees would keep more than 50 % . 
Management 's total could be reduced , and the public could get more than the 15 % control that had been earmarked for British Air . 
One option the board is likely to consider today is some sort of cooling-off period . 
Although the pilots are expected to continue to pursue the bid , UAL Chairman Stephen Wolf may be asked to withdraw from the buy-out effort , at least temporarily , and to return to running the company full time . 
The board could eventually come under some pressure to sell the company because its members can be ousted by a majority shareholder vote , particularly since one-third of UAL stock is held by takeover stock speculators who favor a sale . 
The labor-management buy-out group plans to keep its offer on the table in an apparent attempt to maintain its bargaining position with the board . 
However , the only outsider who has emerged to lead such a shareholder vote , Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis , who triggered the buy-out with a $ 5.4 billion bid in early August , is hanging back -- apparently to avoid being blamed for contributing to the deal 's collapse . 
Three top advisers to Mr. Davis visited New York late last week , at least in part to confer with executives at Citicorp . 
Mr. Davis had paid $ 6 million for Citicorp 's backing of his last bid . 
But Citicorp has lost some credibility because it also led the unsuccessful effort to gain bank loans for the labor-management group . 
On Friday , British Air issued a statement saying it `` does not intend to participate in any new deal for the acquisition of UAL in the foreseeable future . '' 
However , several people said that British Air might yet rejoin the bidding group and that the carrier made the statement to answer questions from British regulators about how it plans to use proceeds of a securities offering previously earmarked for the UAL buy-out . 
Also late last week , UAL flight attendants agreed to participate with the pilots in crafting a revised offer . 
But the machinists union , whose opposition helped scuttle the first buy-out bid , is likely to favor a recapitalization with a friendly third-party investor . 
One advantage the buy-out group intends to press with the board is that pilots have agreed to make $ 200 million in annual cost concessions to help finance a bid . 
Speculation has also arisen that the UAL executive most closely identified with the failure to gain bank financing , chief financial officer John Pope , may come under pressure to resign . 
However , people familiar with the buy-out group said Mr. Pope 's departure would weaken the airline 's management at a critical time . 
Despite the buy-out group 's failure to obtain financing , UAL remains obligated to pay $ 26.7 million in investment banking and legal fees to the group 's advisers , Lazard Freres & Co. , Salomon Brothers Inc. , and Paul Weiss Rifkind Wharton & Garrison . 
Whittle Communications Limited Partnership , Knoxville , Tenn. , will launch its first media property targeting Hispanic women . 
`` La Familia de Hoy , '' or `` Today 's Family , '' will debut this spring and will combine a national bimonthly magazine and TV programming . 
The television element of `` La Familia '' includes a series of two-minute informational features to air seven days a week on the Spanish-language Univision network , a unit of Univision Holdings Inc. , which is 80%-owned by Hallmark Cards Inc . 
The features will focus on `` parenting , family health and nutrition , and financial management , '' and will carry 30 seconds of advertising . 
The magazines , also ad-supported , will be distributed in more than 10,000 doctors ' offices , clinics , and health centers in Hispanic and largely Hispanic communities . 
WEIRTON STEEL Corp. said it completed a $ 300 million sale of 10-year notes , the final step in the 1984 buy-out of the company from National Steel Corp . 
The 10 7\/8 % notes were priced at 99.5 % to yield 10.958 % in an offering managed by Bear , Stearns & Co. , Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. and Lazard Freres & Co. , the company said . 
Weirton , of Weirton , W. Va. , said $ 60.3 million of the proceeds were used to prepay the remaining amounts on the note outstanding to National Intergroup Inc. , the parent of National Steel . 
Remaining proceeds were used to pay other debt and to finance the company 's capital spending program . 
Lep Group PLC of Britain , which holds a 62.42 % stake in Profit Systems Inc. , said it is considering courses of action that could result in its having `` active control '' of the company . 
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission , Lep Group said a possible course of action may include acquiring some or all of the Profit Systems shares it does n't already own . 
It noted , however , that it has n't determined any specific terms of a possible transaction . 
Lep Group and affiliates currently control 3,513,072 Profit Systems common shares , or 62.42 % , the filing said . 
Profit Systems , Valley Stream , N.Y. , is an air freight forwarding concern . 
U.S. official reserve assets rose $ 6.05 billion in September , to $ 68.42 billion , the Treasury Department said . 
The gain compared with a $ 1.10 billion decline in reserve assets in August to $ 62.36 billion , the department said . 
U.S. reserve assets consist of foreign currencies , gold , special drawing rights at the International Monetary Fund and the U.S. reserve position -- its ability to draw foreign currencies -- at the IMF . 
The nation 's holdings of foreign currencies increased $ 5.67 billion in September to $ 39.08 billion , while its gold reserves were virtually unchanged at $ 11.07 billion . 
U.S. holdings of IMF special drawing rights last month rose $ 247 million , to $ 9.49 billion , and its reserve position at the IMF increased $ 142 million , to $ 8.79 billion . 
Alusuisse of America Inc. plans to sell its Consolidated Aluminum Corp. subsidiary as part of its strategy to focus more on aluminum packaging in the U.S. . 
Alusuisse , of New York , declined to say how much it expects to get for the unit ; the company has hired First Boston Corp. to help identify bidders . 
Alusuisse is a subsidiary of Swiss Aluminium Ltd. , a Zurich , Switzerland , producer of aluminum , chemicals and packaging products . 
Consolidated , which had 1988 revenue of $ 400 million , makes aluminum sheet and foil products at its Hannibal , Ohio , and Jackson , Tenn. , rolling mills and recycles aluminum at a plant in Bens Run , W.Va . 
Manhattan National Corp. said Michael A. Conway , president and chief executive officer , was elected chief executive of the holding company 's two principal insurance subsidiaries . 
He succeeds Paul P. Aniskovich Jr. , who resigned to pursue other business interests , the company said . 
Mr. Conway , 42 years old , was elected chairman , president and chief executive of Manhattan Life Insurance Co. and president and chief executive of Manhattan National Life Insurance Co . 
Harry Rossi , 69 , chairman of the holding company , also remains chairman of Manhattan National Life Insurance Co . 
Mr. Conway was executive vice president and chief investment officer of Union Central Life Insurance Co. , of Cincinnati , in 1987 , when Union Central bought a 54 % interest in Manhattan National Corp . 
He resigned as an officer of Central Life to accept the Manhattan National presidency . 
Daniel J. Terra , a director of First Illinois Corp. , said that in August he reduced his stake in First Illinois to 26.48 % of the common shares outstanding . 
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission , Mr. Terra said he sold 263,684 First Illinois common shares from Aug. 9 to Aug. 28 for $ 9.9375 to $ 10.5625 a share . 
As a result of the sales he holds 6,727,042 shares . 
Mr. Terra said in the filing that he sold the stock to decrease his position in the Evanston , Ill. , banking concern . 
He may sell more shares in the open market or in private transactions , but would n't rule out changing his intentions and buying shares , the filing said . 
SciMed Life Systems Inc. , Minneapolis , said a federal appeals court vacated an earlier summary judgment in its favor . 
A lower court in St. Paul had ruled in September 1988 that a heart catheter SciMed manufactures does n't infringe on a patent owned by Advanced Cardiovascular Systems , a unit of Eli Lilly & Co . 
SciMed said the appeals court remanded the case back to the district court for further proceedings . 
In national over-the-counter trading Friday , SciMed shares tumbled $ 2.75 to $ 43 . 
SciMed said it `` remains committed '' both to the `` vigorous defense '' of its position that the catheter does n't infringe the Lilly unit 's patent , and to the pursuit of its own counterclaims , which allege Lilly engaged in antitrust violations and other wrongful acts . 
A REVISED BID FOR UAL is being prepared by a labor-management group , sources said . 
The new proposal , which would transfer majority ownership of United Air 's parent to employees and leave some stock in public hands , would be valued at $ 225 to $ 240 a share , or as much as $ 5.42 billion . 
But UAL 's board is n't expected to give quick approval to any offer substantially below the $ 300-a-share bid that collapsed recently . 
Takeover stock speculators have incurred paper losses of over $ 700 million from the failed UAL offer , their worst loss ever on a single deal . 
Ford and Saab ended talks about a possible alliance after Ford concluded that the cost to modernize Saab 's car operations would outweigh the likely return . 
The collapse Friday prompted speculation that Ford would intensify its pursuit of Jaguar , which is negotiating a defensive alliance with GM . 
Stock prices edged up in quiet trading Friday . 
The Dow Jones industrials rose 5.94 , to 2689.14 , making the gain for the week a record 119.88 points , or 4.7 % . 
Most bond prices fell , but junk bonds and the dollar rose . 
New York City bonds were sold off by many investors last week amid political and economic uncertainty . 
More banks are being hurt by Arizona 's worsening real-estate slump . 
First Interstate Bancorp of Los Angeles said Friday it expects a $ 16 million quarterly loss , citing property-loan losses at its Arizona unit . 
OPEC 's ability to produce more oil than it can sell is starting to cast a shadow over world oil markets . 
OPEC officials worry that prices could collapse a few months from now if the group does n't adopt new quotas . 
Saatchi & Saatchi has attracted offers for some of its advertising units but has rejected them , sources said . 
The proposals , from suitors including Interpublic Group , come as the London-based ad giant struggles through its most difficult period ever . 
Qintex Australia suffered another setback Friday when its Los Angeles-based affiliate filed for Chapter 11 protection . 
Qintex 's $ 1.5 billion pact to buy MGM / UA collapsed recently . 
Kodak entered the high-definition television market by unveiling a device that can convert conventional film into high-definition video . 
A handful of small U.S. firms are refusing to cede the HDTV-screen market to Japanese manufacturers . 
Freight rates are bottoming out and starting to rebound . 
Trucking , shipping and air-freight firms are all planning rate increases , reflecting higher costs and tightened demand . 
Texaco has purchased an oil-producing company in Texas for $ 476.5 million . 
It is Texaco 's first major acquisition since the legal battle with Pennzoil began over four years ago . 
Winnebago posted a widened quarterly loss and slashed its dividend in half , reflecting the deepening slowdown in recreational vehicle sales . 
Markets -- 
Stocks : 
Volume 164,830,000 shares . 
Dow Jones industrials 2689.14 , up 5.94 ; transportation 1230.80 , off 32.71 ; utilities 215.48 , up 0.06 . 
Bonds : 
Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3392.49 , off 
Commodities : 
Dow Jones futures index 129.62 , off 0.51 ; spot index 131.34 , up 0.88 . 
Dollar : 
142.43 yen , up 0.73 ; 1.8578 marks , up 0.0108 . 
Inmac Corp. , a money-losing direct marketer of computer supplies and accessories , said directors suspended payment of its semiannual dividend as too great a drain on funds . 
The company paid five cents a share in April . 
The directors ' action , taken Oct. 10 but announced Friday , had little or no effect on the company 's stock , which stagnated at $ 4.75 in light over-the-counter trading . 
Inmac recently disclosed a $ 12.3 million write-off related to a corporate restructuring that resulted in the company 's posting a $ 6.4 million net loss for the year ended July 29 , compared with year-earlier profit of $ 9.7 million , or $ 1.02 a share . 
Sales rose 12 % to $ 249.5 million from $ 222.8 million . 
`` The board felt that the continued payment of our semiannual dividend was inconsistent with recent operating results , '' said Kenneth A. Eldred , president and chief executive officer . 
`` All our efforts are now focused on improving earnings to the point where we can fund additional new-country development , continue to invest in the business and reinstate the dividend , '' he added . 
The company offers more than 3,500 parts and supplies directly to microcomputer and minicomputer users through catalog sales . 
The Food and Drug Administration said American Home Products Corp. agreed to recall certain generic drugs that were produced by its Quantum Pharmics unit in Amityville , N.Y . 
Quantum stopped shipping the drugs last month , following a federal investigation regarding information the company supplied to obtain three drug approvals . 
The FDA requested the recall of Quantum 's mioxidil tablets , chlorazepate dipotassium tablets and meclofenamate sodium capsules because , it said , the size of the production runs submitted for testing to gain FDA approval was in each case misrepresented as much larger than it actually was . 
American Home Products , based in New York , agreed to recall four other products , trazadone , doxepin , diazepam and lorazapam , because of concerns about data submitted in their original approval applications before the FDA . 
No safety problems with the products are known , the FDA said . 
An FDA spokesperson said the drugs are still available under other brand names . 
Last month , American Home Products said it was suspending production and distribution of all 21 of Quantum 's generic drug products pending the completion of an exhaustive internal audit . 
It also temporarily closed Quantum , because of the internal investigation , as well as the FDA 's ongoing inquiry . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , American Home Products rose 75 cents to $ 105 on Friday . 
Lyondell Petrochemical Co. said third-quarter net income fell 54 % , to $ 73 million , or 91 cents a share , from $ 160 million a year earlier . 
Year-earlier per-share results are n't applicable because the company went public in January . 
Revenue rose 7.7 % to $ 1.28 billion from $ 1.18 billion . 
The petrochemical maker said the biggest reason earnings declined was a loss of production time and the increased costs associated with a temporary maintenance closing and expansion of an olefins plant . 
Like other refiners , Lyondell 's margins for chemicals and gasoline were narrower . 
While the company said chemical margins continued to worsen this quarter , costs will be lower because the maintenance and expansions are complete . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday , Lyondell was unchanged at $ 18.50 a share . 
Four former Cordis Corp. officials were acquitted of federal charges related to the Miami-based company 's sale of pacemakers , including conspiracy to hide pacemaker defects . 
Jurors in U.S. District Court in Miami cleared Harold Hershhenson , a former executive vice president ; John Pagones , a former vice president ; and Stephen Vadas and Dean Ciporkin , who had been engineers with Cordis . 
Earlier this year , Cordis , a maker of medical devices , agreed to plead guilty to felony and misdemeanor charges related to the pacemakers and to pay the government about $ 5.7 million in fines and other costs . 
Cordis sold its pacemaker operations two years ago to Telectronics Holding Ltd. of Australia . 
PAPERS : 
Management and unions representing 2,400 employees at Torstar Corp. 's Toronto Star reached a tentative contract agreement Friday , averting a strike by most employees of Canada 's largest daily newspaper . 
Members of the largest union , representing 1,700 workers , voted in favor of the pact yesterday . 
Four other unions have yet to vote , but their leadership also recommended approval . 
The pact proposes a 2 1 / 2-year contract with a raise of 8 % in the first year , 7 % in the second and 4 % for the final six months . 
Amgen Inc. said its second-quarter earnings increased more than tenfold to $ 3.9 million , or 22 cents a share , due to increased sales of the company 's new antianemia drug for kidney patients . 
The Thousand Oaks , Calif.-based biotechnology company reported a 97 % increase in revenue to $ 42.5 million for the quarter ended Sept. 30 . 
In the year-ago period , Amgen reported net income of $ 320,000 , or two cents a share , on revenue of $ 21.5 million . 
For the six months , the company reported a more than sixfold increase in earnings to $ 4.7 million , or 26 cents a share , from $ 625,000 , or four cents a share a year ago . 
Revenue rose 77 % to $ 72.6 million , from last year 's $ 41 million . 
LEBANESE LAWMAKERS APPROVED a peace plan but Aoun rejected it . 
Lebanon 's Parliament passed the power-sharing accord to end the country 's 14-year-old conflict , but the Christian military leader wad the plan was `` full of ambiguities . '' 
The Arab League-sponsored pact , drafted during three weeks of talks at the Saudi Arabian resort of Taif , includes Syrian proposals for at least a partial troop pullout from Lebanon , and guarantees an equal number of seats for Moslems and Christians in the Parliament . 
The rejection by Aoun , who has demanded a total and immediate pull-out of Damascus 's 33,000 troops , puts the future of the agreement in doubt . 
NORTHERN CALIFORNIA BRACED for earthquake-related traffic jams . 
As rescuers pressed their efforts after finding a survivor in a collapsed freeway , the San Francisco Bay area girded for hundreds of thousands of commuters seeking to avoid routes ravaged by last Tuesday 's tremor . 
In Oakland , officials said the 57-year-old longshoreman who spent four days entombed in rubble was in critical condition with slight improvement . 
Estimates of damage in the area , visited Friday by Bush , topped $ 5 billion . 
The baseball commissioner announced that the third game of the World Series between the Giants and the Athletics would n't resume until Friday . 
THE U.S. . IS REQUIRED to notify foreign dictators of certain coup plans . 
Under guidelines included in an exchange of letters between the Reagan administration and the Senate Intelligence panel last year , the U.S. must inform foreign dictators of plans likely to endanger their lives . 
The existence of the policy became known after Bush disclosed it to seven GOP senators last week , citing the plan as an example of congressional requirements the administration contends contribute to the failure of covert actions , officials said . 
Bush conceded that the requirement did n't affect a decision to lend only minor support to this month 's failed effort to oust Panama 's Noriega , aides said . 
The shuttle Atlantis 's crew prepared to return to Earth today several hours earlier than planned to avoid high winds forecast at the landing site at Edwards Air Force Base , Calif . 
The five astronauts , who stowed gear and tested the spacecraft 's steering , said they were unconcerned about the touchy weather expected in the Mojave Desert . 
Commonwealth leaders issued a declaration giving South Africa six months to deliver on pledges to ease apartheid or face new reprisals . 
The 49-nation organization , meeting in Malaysia , called for tighter financial pressure immediately . 
Britain 's Prime Minister Thatcher alone dissented . 
East Germany 's leadership vowed swift action to ease travel to the West . 
Despite the pledge by the Communist rulers , tens of thousands of people across the country staged marches over the weekend to demand democratic freedoms . 
In Leipzig , more than 500 people met with local party officials to discuss internal changes . 
The Senate convicted federal Judge Alcee Hastings of Miami of eight impeachment articles , removing him from the bench . 
The chamber voted 69-26 Friday to convict the judge of perjury and bribery conspiracy . 
It marked the first time a U.S. official was impeached on charges of which a jury had acquitted him . 
Rep. Garcia and his wife were found guilty by a federal jury in New York of extorting $ 76,000 from Wedtech Corp. in return for official acts by the New York Democrat . 
The jury also convicted them of extortion in obtaining a $ 20,000 interest-free loan from an officer of the defunct defense contractor . 
Authorities in Honduras launched an investigation into the cause of Saturday 's crash of a Honduran jetliner that killed 132 of the 146 people aboard . 
The Boeing 727 , en route to Honduras from Costa Rica via Nicaragua , smashed into the hills outside Tegucigalpa as it approached the capital 's airport in high winds and low clouds . 
The U.S. and Israel have been holding what an aide to Prime Minister Shamir called intense telephone negotiations in an effort to bridge differences over Mideast peace moves . 
The Labor Party , meanwhile , threatened to support a parliamentary motion to topple the coalition unless Shamir showed flexibility on Arab-Israeli talks . 
Nicaragua 's Defense Ministry said a group of Contra rebels ambushed two trucks carrying troops in northern Nicaragua , killing 18 of the soldiers . 
The incident occurred Saturday night . 
The Sandinista government and the U.S.-backed insurgents agreed in March to suspend offensive operations , but there has been sporadic fighting . 
Scientists have isolated a molecule that may hold potential as a treatment for disruptions of the immune system , ranging from organ-transplant rejection , to allergies and asthma , Immunex Corp. said . 
The molecule is the mouse version of a protein called the interleukin-4 receptor , which directs the growth and function of white blood cells . 
Died : Alfred Hayes , 79 , former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York , Saturday , in New Canaan , Conn . 
Contel Corp. said third-quarter net income increased 16 % to $ 72 million , or 45 cents a share , from $ 62 million , or 39 cents a share , as a result of strong growth in telephone-access lines and long-distance minutes of use . 
The telecommunications company 's results included a one-time gain of $ 4 million , or two cents a share , from the sale of Contel Credit , a leasing and financial-services subsidiary . 
Revenue rose 8.3 % to $ 780 million from $ 720 million . 
Telephone-operations quarterly profit increased 9 % to $ 84 million from $ 77 million , while federal-systems earnings declined 33 % to $ 4 million from $ 6 million . 
Information systems posted a loss of $ 8 million , compared with a loss of $ 9 million a year earlier . 
Customer-access lines increased at an annualized rate of about 4 % and minutes of long-distance use rose about 12 % . 
A 10 % gain in operating profit in the quarter was offset by a 21 % boost in interest expense , reflecting higher consolidated borrowings and interest rates . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Contel closed at $ 33.75 a share , down .50 cents . 
In East Germany , where humor has long been the only way to express political criticism , they 're not laughing about their new leader Egon Krenz . 
Mr. Krenz is such a contradictory figure that nobody has even come up with any good jokes about him . 
`` You have to have clear feelings about someone before you can make jokes , '' says an East German mother of two who loves swapping political barbs with her friends . 
`` With Krenz , we just do n't know what to expect . '' 
Mr. Krenz does n't seem to be the knee-jerk hardliner many initially thought he was when the 52-year-old Politburo member was selected last week to succeed Erich Honecker . 
But he does n't appear to be ready to make broad changes either . 
According to East Germany 's ADN news agency , Mr. Krenz spoke to Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev by telephone over the weekend and acknowledged East Germany could learn from Moscow 's glasnost policies . 
Already last week , Mr. Krenz started overhauling East Germany 's heavily censored and notoriously boring news media . 
On Thursday , a day after he took office , East German television broke into regular programming to launch a talk show in which viewers call in questions for a panel of officials to answer . 
The regular nightly news program and daily newspapers are also getting a visible injection of Soviet-style glasnost . 
`` It was quite a shock , '' says a 43-year-old East German shopkeeper . 
`` For the first time in my life , I was n't sure whether I was listening to our news or West German television . '' 
Other changes , including easing restrictions on travel for East Germans , are expected . 
But whether such moves can win back the confidence of East Germans , who have taken to the streets by the thousands in recent weeks to demand democratic changes , depends largely on whether they feel they can trust Mr. Krenz . 
And that 's a problem . 
Mr. Krenz is not only closely identified with his mentor , Mr. Honecker , but also blamed for ordering violent police action against protesters this month and for praising China for sending tanks against student demonstrators . 
`` I hope he grows with the job , '' says Rainer Eppelmann , a Protestant pastor in East Berlin . 
`` The most important thing is that he have a chance . '' 
Although Mr. Krenz is dedicated to East Germany 's conservative vein of communism , there is much about his style that sets him apart from his party comrades . 
Unlike Mr. Honecker , who tended to lecture people about socialist values , Mr. Krenz enjoys asking questions . 
Indeed , one of his first actions as leader was to visit a gritty machine factory on the outskirts of Berlin and wander among the workers -- a la Gorbachev . 
He was later shown on television , fielding questions . 
At one point , he asked a worker whether he thought East Germans were fleeing the country because of restrictive travel policies . 
The worker 's tart reply : `` It 's more than just travel . 
People have a sense the government is ignoring the real problems in our society . '' 
The exchange was all the more remarkable in that authorities released television footage to Western news agencies . 
This same tendency toward openness impressed a group of visiting U.S. congressmen this spring . 
Rather than trying to `` lecture us , '' says one congressional aide who attended the two-hour meeting , Mr. Krenz `` wanted to listen . '' 
Rep. Ronnie Flippo ( D. , Ala. ) , one of the members of the delegation , says he was particularly impressed by Mr. Krenz 's ready admission that East Germany needed to change . 
`` He 's a very tough man , but one who 's also open to arguments , '' adds an aide to West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl . 
But there 's another side to Mr. Krenz . 
Born in a Baltic town in an area which is now part of Poland , he has dedicated his life to the party apparatus . 
He moved quickly through the ranks with the help of his patron , Mr. Honecker , and emerged as the heir apparent . 
Barbara Donovan , an expert on East Germany at Radio Free Europe in Munich , says Mr. Krenz may project a smooth image , but she doubts he 's a true reformer . 
Even if he is , she adds , he appears to have only limited room for maneuver within the Communist Party 's ruling Politburo . 
Against this background , the new East German leader must move quickly to shore up his government 's standing . 
The sudden growth of the opposition movement , together with the steady outflow of citizens escaping through Poland and Hungary , has plunged the country into its deepest political crisis since an anti-Soviet workers ' uprising in 1953 . 
`` He does n't have any honeymoon period , '' says a Western diplomat based in East Berlin . 
`` But if he 's sharp and quick , he has a chance . '' 
The diplomat adds that Mr. Krenz has several things going for him . 
The East German economy is strong compared with other East bloc nations . 
And his relative youth could help him project a more vibrant image , contrasting with the perception of Mr. Honecker as an out-of-touch old man . 
For average East Germans , Mr. Krenz remains a puzzle . 
`` Either he was n't being real in the past , or he is n't being real right now , '' says a 30-year-old East German doctor . 
`` Either way , I have a problem with how quickly he 's changed . '' 
The doctor was among dozens of people milling through East Berlin 's Gethsemane Church Saturday morning . 
The walls of the church are covered with leaflets , news clippings , and handwritten notes associated with the country 's political opposition . 
`` I have to come here to read the walls , '' says the doctor , `` because it 's information I still ca n't get through the newspapers . '' 
Meanwhile , East Germany 's growing openness may even allow the state-controlled news media to display a muted sense of humor . 
Television last week carried a new report on East Berlin 's main wallpaper factory and the need to boost production . 
East Germans remember a comment a few years ago by Kurt Hager , the government 's top ideologist , that just because a neighbor hangs new wallpaper , there 's no reason to change your own . 
His point was there is no reason for East Germany to copy Soviet-style changes . 
`` It 's hard to know whether it was intended to be funny , '' says the East Berlin shopkeeper , `` But everyone I know laughed about it . 
The list of laboratories claiming to be producing inexplicable amounts of heat from `` cold fusion '' experiments is slowly growing . 
But the experiments continue to be plagued by lack of firm evidence that the extra heat is coming from the fusing of hydrogen atoms . 
New experiments at some of the big national laboratories are still unable to find hints of nuclear fusion reactions , leaving only the finding of tritium in a Texas experiment to support University of Utah chemists ' claim of achieving hydrogen fusion at room temperatures . 
The latest developments in cold fusion research were presented in 24 reports delivered at the fall meeting here of the Electrochemical Society , the first scientific meeting in five months to hear formal reports on cold fusion experiments . 
The meeting offered stark evidence of a dramatic fall in scientific interest in cold fusion research . 
Of the 1,300 chemists registered for the society 's weeklong meeting , fewer than 200 sat through the day and a half of cold fusion presentations at week 's end . 
This was in contrast with the society 's meeting last May , at the height of the controversy , when more than 1,500 scientists , along with scores of reporters and TV crews , crowded into a Los Angeles hotel ballroom for a tumultuous special night session on the subject . 
Neither of the two chemists whose Utah experiments triggered the cold fusion uproar , Martin Fleischmann and B. Stanley Pons , were at the meeting . 
But some members of an ad hoc expert committee set up by the Department of Energy to evaluate the cold fusion research were in the audience . 
The committee is to recommend at the end of the month whether DOE should support cold fusion research . 
Most of the two dozen scientists taking the podium reported results with new , more sophisticated variations of the seemingly simple electrolysis-of-water experiments described last March by Messrs. Fleischmann and Pons . 
The experiments involve encircling a thin rod of palladium metal with a wire of platinum and plunging the two electrodes into `` heavy '' water in which the hydrogen atoms are a doubly heavy form known as deuterium . 
When an electric current is applied to the palladium and platinum electrodes , the heavy water did begin to break up , or dissociate . 
Ordinarily the electrolysis , or breakup , of the water would consume almost all of the electrical energy . 
But Messrs. Fleischmann and Pons said their experiments also produced large amounts of heat . 
The heat energy plus the energy consumed by the breakup of the water molecules added to far more energy coming out of the apparatus than electrical energy going in , they reported . 
Because they also detected tritium and indications of nuclear radiation , they asserted that the `` excess '' heat energy must be coming from energy released by the nuclear fusion of deuterium atoms inside the palladium rod . 
As of last weekend , a dozen labs also have reported measuring `` excess '' heat from similar electrolytic experiments , although amounts of such heat vary widely . 
One of the seven reports presented here of excess heat production was given by Richard A. Oriani , professor of chemical engineering at the University of Minnesota . 
Mr. Oriani said his skepticism of the Utah claims was initially confirmed when his first experiments last spring failed to produce results . 
But he then borrowed a palladium rod from chemists at Texas A&M who said they were getting excess heat . 
`` The results were fascinating , '' he said . 
On the fourth `` run '' with the borrowed rod , the experiment began producing excess heat . 
The experiment was stopped briefly to change an instrument . 
When it was restarted , heat output `` really took off '' and produced excess heat for several hours before dying down , he said . 
Typical of other experiments , Mr. Oriani said his experiment was `` very erratic . '' 
It would go along doing nothing but dissociating the heavy water and then at totally unpredictable times , it would begin producing excess heat for as long as 10 or 11 hours before quieting down . 
The excess heat was 15 % to 20 % more than the energy involved in the electrolysis of water . 
Mr. Oriani said the heat bursts were too large and too long to be explained by the sudden release of energy that might have slowly accumulated during the experiments ' quiescent times , as some scientists have suggested . 
`` There is a reality to the excess energy , '' he said . 
Other scientists said they also were getting sporadic bursts of excess heat lasting several hours at a time . 
The bursts often occur , they said , after they `` perturbed '' the experiments by raising or lowering the amount of electric current being applied , or switching the current off and on . 
One chemist privately suggested this hinted that some `` anomalous '' chemical reactions might be producing the heat . 
One reason questions surround the heat experiments is that they involve unusually meticulous measurements . 
Typically , the input energy ranges from a third of a watt to one watt and the excess energy is measured in tenths of a watt . 
One exception is a continuing experiment at Stanford University where as much as 10 watts of energy are being put into the electrolytic cells . 
A cell filled with heavy water is producing 1.0 to 1.5 watts more heat than an identical electrolytic cell filled with ordinary water next to it , reported Turgut M. Gur , an associate of materials scientist Robert A. Huggins , head of the Stanford experimental team . 
One of the few hints the excess heat might be produced by fusion came from brief remarks by chemist John Bockris of Texas A&M University . 
Mr. Bockris previously reported getting bursts of excess heat and of detecting increasing amounts of tritium forming in the heavy water . 
He said that within the past few days , he 's gotten evidence that there is a `` weak correlation '' between the time the heat bursts occur and the production of tritium . 
There is n't any way to continuously measure the amount of tritium in the heavy water , so it 's been difficult to tell whether the tritium formation is related to the heat bursts or some other phenomenon . 
Increasingly careful attempts to measure neutrons , which would be strong evidence of fusion reactions , continue to be negative . 
Messrs. Fleischmann and Pons initially reported indirect evidence of neutrons being produced in their experiment but later conceded the measurements were questionable . 
Researchers at Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque , N.M. , reported they went so far as to take a `` cold fusion '' experiment and three neutron detectors into a tunnel under 300 feet of granite to shield the detectors from cosmic rays . 
A number of times they detected neutrons in one , sometimes two , of the three detectors , but only once during 411 hours of the experiment did they detect a neutron burst in all three detectors -- and they think that was a spurious event . 
Shimson Gottesfeld of Los Alamos National Laboratory said researchers there detected a burst of neutrons from an early cold fusion experiment last April but decided not to announce it until they could confirm it . 
In subsequent experiments , one of two neutron detectors occasionally indicated a burst of neutrons but neutron bursts were never recorded in both detectors at the same time . 
They concluded the indications of neutrons stemmed from faults in the detectors rather than from the cold fusion experiment . 
At the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory in California , new experiments indicated that the lithium added to the heavy water so it will conduct a current can produce previously unsuspected electrical effects on the surface of the palladium rod -- which Messrs. Fleischmann and Pons might have misinterpreted , reported Philip Ross from the California laboratory . 
Dow Jones & Co. announced Wall Street Journal advertising rates for 1990 . 
The rates , which take effect Jan. 2 , include a 4 % increase for national edition advertising . 
The Journal also will offer expanded volume and frequency discounts . 
The increase for national edition advertising is less than the inflation rate and compares with a 6.5 % increase in 1989 . 
`` Newsprint and postage prices this year have not gone up , '' said Peter R. Kann , president of Dow Jones . 
`` We have invested in improved editorial quality and expanded our quality audience without substantially increasing our costs . 
Fundamental fairness and a sense of responsibility lead us to share operating efficiencies with our customers . '' 
Advertising rates for the Eastern , Midwest , Western and Southwest editions will increase an average 5.5 % , and rates for localized advertising editions will increase 7.5 % . 
Rates for the Wall Street Journal Reports will remain unchanged . 
A one-time noncontract full-page advertisement in The Wall Street Journal national edition will cost $ 99,385 . 
Advertising rates for The Wall Street Journal / Europe , published in Brussels and printed in the Netherlands and Switzerland , will increase 9 % . 
Rates for The Asian Wall Street Journal , published and printed in Hong Kong and also printed in Singapore and Tokyo , will rise 8 % . 
Rates for The Asian Wall Street Journal Weekly , published in New York for North American readers , will rise 6 % . 
Dow Jones also publishes Barron 's magazine , other periodicals and community newspapers and operates electronic business information services . 
It owns 67 % of Telerate Inc. , a leading supplier of computerized financial information on global markets . 
Reflecting the impact of lower semiconductor prices and cuts in defense spending , Texas Instruments Inc. said third-quarter net income fell 31 % and sales dropped slightly from a year earlier . 
Net fell to $ 65 million , or 67 cents a common share , from $ 93.7 million or $ 1.03 a share , a year ago . 
Sales fell 2.5 % to $ 1.54 billion from $ 1.58 billion . 
For the nine months , the electronics and defense concern had net of $ 255.8 million , or $ 2.70 a share , down 5.6 % from $ 271 million , or $ 3.01 a share , in the year-ago period . 
Sales were $ 4.66 billion , up 1.3 % from $ 4.6 billion . 
Jerry Junkins , chairman , president and chief executive officer , said sluggish consumer-electronics sales reduced demand for semiconductors . 
That , coupled with lower semiconductor prices and higher semiconductor-depreciation expense , contributed to the decline in sales and profit . 
In addition , cost increases related to fixed-price defense contracts and a $ 10 million charge to reduce the work force of Texas Instruments ' defense-electronics division also reduced net . 
However , the quarter results included $ 28 million in royalty income from patent licenses , up from $ 21 million in the year-earlier period . 
The nine months include $ 125 million of royalty income , up from $ 98 million last year . 
Mr. Junkins was n't optimistic about the short-term outlook , hinting that further workforce reductions may be needed . 
`` We expect near-term sluggishness in the electronics market , '' he said , `` and we will take ongoing cost-reduction actions as necessary to keep operations aligned with demand . '' 
Further , he said , an internal reorganization to combine several divisions into the Information Technology Group is expected to affect fourth-quarter results by an undisclosed amount . 
Lynch Corp. said its Lynch Telephone Corp. subsidiary completed the acquisition of Western New Mexico Telephone Co. for $ 20 million plus assumption of $ 24 million of debt . 
Western New Mexico Telephone , Silver City , had net income of $ 1.9 million on revenue of about $ 10 million last year . 
It is an independent phone company with a service area of 15,000 square miles in southwest New Mexico . 
It is also a partner in the wireline cellular franchise covering most of western New Mexico . 
The transaction represents Lynch 's entry into the telephone business . 
The company , which has interests in television , trucking services , and glass-making and food-processing equipment , said it plans to make other acquisitions in the telephone industry . 
Nelson Bunker Hunt 's attempted corner on silver a decade ago is still haunting the market in this metal . 
Silver , now trading around $ 5 an ounce , surged to an all-time peak of $ 50 an ounce in January 1980 from around $ 9 in mid-1979 . 
`` Mr. Hunt 's attempt to squeeze the silver market 10 years ago is still indirectly to blame for today 's market depression , '' says Lesley Edgar , managing director of Sharps Pixley Ltd. , London bullion brokers . 
While some 100 million ounces of silver once held by Mr. Hunt and Middle Eastern associates are n't hanging over the market anymore , the price surge of 1979-80 precipitated an expansion of mine production and scrap recovery and encouraged silver consumers to economize on silver use , Mr. Edgar says . 
Photographic developers , for example , bought equipment to recover silver from spent photographs , negatives and processing solutions . 
Meanwhile , the photographic industry , which accounts for 44 % of silver consumption , continues to look for substitutes . 
Japanese and U.S. photographic firms are beginning to produce electronic cameras and X-rays that do n't require silver , dealers say . 
Silver 's history of volatility is also discouraging investors , dealers say . 
Even in the present uncertain investment climate , investors are preferring `` quality assets '' such as Treasury bills and bonds to gold , silver and platinum , dealers say . 
Although prices rallied briefly following the tumble on world stock markets earlier this month and the related decline of the dollar , precious metals are out of favor for the moment because of high interest rates and a determination by industrial nations to curb inflation , dealers say . 
Silver , however is in a deeper slump than are gold and platinum . 
Some analysts contend that silver is cheap now that prices are languishing at levels last seen in the mid-1970s . 
`` Bargain hunters believe that silver offers the best value amongst precious metals , '' says Frederick R. Demler , analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc . 
A further decline in prices will lead to mine production cuts in the U.S. , he says . 
Scrap merchants are converting smaller quantities of metal into silver , while low prices are discouraging exports from India and the Soviet Union . 
Silver prices could also be boosted by strikes in leading producing nations Peru and Mexico , Mr. Demler says . 
Meanwhile , total fabrication demand for silver has risen six years in a row , he says . 
Japanese demand grew by 70 % in the first half of this year and the nation plans an issue of a silver commemorative coin that will require 4.5 million ounces . 
Compared with huge annual surpluses of more than 100 million ounces in the first half of the 1980s , world silver supplies and consumption are now nearly in balance , Mr. Demler says . 
Despite intermittent rallies in the past few years , improvements in the supply-demand balance have n't managed to push silver prices into a higher range . 
`` There 's just too much silver around , '' says Tom Butler , an analyst at Samuel Montagu & Co. , a London bullion house . 
A huge silver stockpile at exchanges , refiners , consuming industries and government warehouses of at least 617 million ounces is the market depressant , says Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in a report . 
This year alone , inventories at the Commodity Exchange of New York jumped `` by a staggering 46 million to 221 million ounces '' because of producer deliveries , de-stocking by fabricators and sales by disenchanted investors , says Rhona O'Connell , London-based precious metals analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton . 
`` Silver production is also in an inexorable upward trend , '' Ms. O'Connell says . 
Moreover , while Asian and Middle Eastern investors hoard gold and help underpin its price , silver does n't have the same mystique , dealers say . 
Investors have gotten burned on silver so often that they are far more partial to gold , says Urs Seiler , senior vice president at Union Bank of Switzerland . 
Yet if gold prices improve , silver prices could rally sharply , he says . 
However , dealers caution that any increase would be $ 1 to $ 2 at most . 
Looking ahead to other commodity markets this week : 
Livestock and Meats 
Analysts expect the prices of live cattle futures contracts to rise in trading today in the wake of a government quarterly census that found fewer-than-expected cattle on feedlots . 
After the close of trading Friday , the Agriculture Department reported that feedlots in the 13 biggest ranch states held 8.06 million cattle on Oct. 1 , down 6 % from that date a year earlier . 
Most analysts had expected the government to report a 4 % decline . 
Feedlots fatten young cattle for slaughter , so a decline signals a tightening supply of beef . 
The government reported that the number of young cattle placed on feedlots during the quarter dropped 5 % compared with the year-earlier quarter . 
Many industry analysts had been projecting a 3 % decline in placements for the quarter . 
In the 1988 quarter , many farmers were forced to sell their cattle to feedlot operators because the drought dried out the pasture on their ranches . 
The number of cattle moving onto feedlots in the recent quarter was also lower because fattening cattle is less profitable . 
A shortage of young cattle has made them more expensive for feedlot operators to buy . 
The Agriculture Department also said that the number of fattened cattle slaughtered in the quarter dropped by 5 % from the 1988 quarter , which was in line with projections by analysts . 
Energy 
Friday 's 44-cent-a-barrel price drop to $ 19.98 in the expiring November contract for West Texas Intermediate crude may well set the tone for trading this week in petroleum futures on the New York Mercantile Exchange . 
Most traders and analysts attributed the decline to technical factors associated with the contract 's going off the board . 
Others said that the drop continued the downward correction that 's been due in the petroleum pits and that such a trend could well continue in the next several trading sessions . 
Barring any petroleum-related news events , trading in the days ahead should further test recent projections by oil economists and other market watchers that strong fourth-quarter demand will keep prices firm . 
Copper 
Copper prices fell sharply Friday afternoon . 
For example , copper for December delivery settled 4.5 cents lower at $ 1.2345 a pound . 
Pressure came from several developments including the settlement of two long-term strikes . 
On Friday , one analyst said , rank-and-file workers ratified a new labor agreement ending a three-month strike at the Highland Valley mine in British Columbia . 
In Mexico , the analyst added , employees at the Cananea mine , who have been out of work since late August when the mine was declared bankrupt by the government , accepted a 35 % cut in the 3,800-man work force . 
The mine is expected to return to production in about a week . 
On Friday , selling dominated the afternoon `` curb '' session in London , which takes place at noon EDT . 
The premium of cash copper to the three-month forward offerings narrowed , indicating weaker demand for cash copper . 
Long-term support for the December contract was believed to be at $ 1.25 a pound . 
A technical analyst said there were a number of stop-loss orders under that level that were touched off when the contract 's price fell below it . 
That brought in considerable fund selling , which continued until the close of trading . 
`` In general , it was a bearish close , '' said Ben Hanauer , a copper trader at Rudolph Wolff & Co. , a major commodities trading and brokerage firm . 
But whether this price break has implications for this week , he said , `` we will know more when the London Metal Exchange copper stock levels are released Monday morning . '' 
Another analyst said he expected LME inventories to be down by about 15,000 tons when the weekly report is issued . 
Bernard Savaiko , senior commodities analyst at PaineWebber Inc. , said that when traders saw the market was n't reacting positively to the forecasts of lower LME stocks , they perceived a bearish sign . 
He also noted that the Japanese , who had been buying at prices just above the $ 1.25 level , apparently pulled back from the market on Friday . 
Mr. Savaiko said he sees a possibility of the December contract dropping to $ 1.05 a pound . 
Hewlett-Packard Co. will announce today a software program that allows computers in a network to speed up computing tasks by sending the tasks to each other . 
Called Task Broker , the program acts something like an auctioneer among a group of computers wired together . 
If a machine has a big computing task , Task Broker asks other computers in the network for `` bids '' on the job . 
It then determines which machine is free to do the task most quickly and sends the task to that machine . 
Hewlett-Packard claims that the software allows a network to run three times as many tasks as conventional networks and will run each task twice as fast . 
The new Hewlett-Packard program , said analyst John McCarthy at Forrester Research Inc. , a computer-market research company , `` is a key building block as people move to this new model of distributed processing . '' 
In today 's computer networks , some machines often sit idle while others are overtaxed . 
With the Hewlett-Packard program , he said , `` You get more bang for the buck you 've spent on computers . '' 
The program , which will be shipped in January 1990 , runs on the Unix operating system . 
Hewlett-Packard will charge $ 5,000 for a license covering 10 users . 
The program now works on all Hewlett-Packard and Apollo workstations and on computers made by Multiflow Computer Inc. of Branford , Conn . 
Hewlett-Packard said it will sell versions later next year that run on Sun Microsystems Inc. and Digital Equipment Corp. machines . 
The Task Broker differs from other programs that spread computing tasks around a network . 
A previously available program called Network Computing System , developed by Hewlett-Packard 's Apollo division , for instance , takes a task and splits it up into parts , divvying up those parts to several computers in a network for simultaneous processing . 
But programs in individual computers must be revised in order to work with that system . 
Applications wo n't have to be rewritten to work with Task Broker , Hewlett-Packard said , and the user of a computer wo n't be able to tell that another machine is doing the work . 
The Task Broker `` turns that network into -- as far as the user is concerned -- one giant computer , '' said Bill Kay , general manager of Hewlett-Packard 's workstation group . 
Price wars between the fast-food giants are starting to clobber the fast-food little guys : the franchisees . 
`` When elephants start fighting , ants get killed , '' says Murray Riese , co-owner of National Restaurants , a New York franchisee for Pizza Hut , Roy Rogers and other chains . 
As hamburger and pizza outlets saturate one area after another , franchisers are struggling desperately for market share , slashing prices and stepping up costly promotions . 
The fight is putting a tight squeeze on profits of many , threatening to drive the smallest ones out of business and straining relations between the national fast-food chains and their franchisees . 
The chains `` used to offer discounts during winter when business was slow , but in the last year or so , discounting has become a 12-month thing , '' says Donald Harty , president of Charisma Group Inc. , a New York franchisee of Grand Metropolitan PLC 's Burger King chain . 
Though Charisma 's sales are up slightly this year , Mr. Harty says profits will be flat or lower . 
And Bill Konopnicki , a Safford , Ariz. , licensee of McDonald 's Corp. who is chairman of the company 's National Operators Advisory Board , says some fast-food outlets `` could be in serious trouble , based on the amount of discounting that seems to be going on . '' 
Until recently , the huge fast-food industry , with sales of about $ 60.1 billion last year , kept price-skirmishing to a minimum . 
But early this year , PepsiCo Inc. 's Taco Bell unit and Wendy 's International Inc. slashed prices and stepped up promotions , says John Rohs , an analyst for Wertheim Schroder & Co . 
That brought a chain reaction in the industry . 
The situation was further aggravated early this month , when McDonald 's set plans to heat up the discounting by offering coupons . 
It also decided to go national with pizza , which it has been test-marketing . 
Now , two-for-one deals on pizza are common ; so are 99-cent specials on sandwiches normally priced twice as high . 
The discounting , say fast-food operators , occurs on a scale and with a frequency they have n't seen before . 
The result is that some franchisees are running hard just to stay even , laying off middle managers and working harder to make less . 
Joe Mack , a district manager for Cormack Enterprises Inc. , a Burger King operator in Omaha , Neb. , says discounting is so prevalent that `` we have to serve 15 % to 20 % more customers '' to keep sales level . 
`` It 's almost as if you 're doing extra work to give away the food , '' he says . 
Alan D'Agosto , president of Panda 's Inc. , an operator of Arby 's restaurants in Omaha , says : `` All we 're doing is keeping the customers coming , but we are n't increasing sales . '' 
With fast-food outlets on every corner , he , like many , does n't think he has a choice in the price war : `` Our customers say that they wo n't go into a fast-food store unless they get a coupon . '' 
If the battle continues much longer , many fast-food businesses will close or merge , predicts Vincent Morrissey , who owns a string of Kentucky Fried Chicken stores in the Midwest . 
`` The industry is overbuilt , '' he says . 
`` Fast-food franchisers have managed to squeeze in stores into every corner available . '' 
The National Restaurant Association says quick-service restaurant units in the U.S. rose 14 % to 131,146 between 1983 and 1987 , the last year for which figures are available . 
With the market so crowded , says a spokesman for Wendy 's in Columbus , Ohio , `` If you 're doing well , you 're doing well at someone else 's expense . '' 
Simply put , there is n't enough business for every store to grow . 
According to Mr. Rohs , inflation-adjusted , same-store sales at company-owned Wendy 's units in the U.S. have trailed year-earlier levels throughout 1989 , except for August . 
`` McDonald 's has also been running negative all year , '' the analyst says . 
Spokesmen for Wendy 's and McDonald 's criticized Mr. Rohs 's calculations . 
Jack Greenberg , executive vice president and chief financial officer of McDonald 's , says the company does n't compute , much less disclose , inflation-adjusted , same-store sales . 
He adds that short-term comparisons `` can be very misleading because of differences in timing of marketing programs from year to year . '' 
Profit margins at company-owned McDonald 's outlets in the U.S. `` are holding up quite nicely , '' says Mr. Greenberg . 
Profits of franchisees have n't been higher since the mid-1970s , he adds . 
But Mr. Greenberg 's sanguine outlook is n't matched by many fast-food industry observers . 
Smaller chains and single-store operators will be the first to fail , many in the industry predict . 
Big franchise groups `` can ride out the storm a lot longer , '' says Mr. Harty , the Burger King operator in New York . 
The prolonged price pressures are driving a wedge between some franchisers and their franchisees . 
Mr. Morrissey , the Kentucky Fried Chicken franchisee , notes that most franchise owners must absorb increases in expenses without any cut in the royalties , or portion of sales , that they must pay franchisers . 
Franchisees ca n't be forced to go along with a franchiser 's discounting . 
But once a franchisee agrees to a promotional program , the franchiser can demand full participation to the very end , says Lew Rudnick , a principal of Rudnick & Wolfe , a Chicago law firm with franchise industry clients . 
He says courts have held that antitrust considerations are outweighed in such cases by the need to protect consumers from deceptive marketing . 
In any case , many franchisees , in order to stay on good terms with franchisers , routinely go along with promotions . 
Says Mr. Riese of National Restaurants : `` If you resisted on prices , maybe you would never get that telephone call about a new franchise . 
Companies listed below reported quarterly profit substantially different from the average of analysts ' estimates . 
The companies are followed by at least three analysts , and had a minimum five-cent change in actual earnings per share . 
Estimated and actual results involving losses are omitted . 
The percent difference compares actual profit with the 30-day estimate where at least three analysts have issues forecasts in the past 30 days . 
Otherwise , actual profit is compared with the 300-day estimate . 
Companies listed below reported quarterly profit substantially different from the average of analysts ' estimates . 
The companies are followed by at least three analysts , and had a minimum five-cent change in actual earnings per share . 
Estimated and actual results involving losses are omitted . 
The percent difference compares actual profit with the 30-day estimate where at least three analysts have issues forecasts in the past 30 days . 
Otherwise , actual profit is compared with the 300-day estimate . 
CalMat Co. said it completed a $ 32.8 million sale of assets from its Los Angeles area real estate portfolio for net income of $ 12 million . 
CalMat said the sale is part of its previously announced plan to sell much of its real estate holdings to focus on its core business of mining and producing asphalt , concrete , rock and sand . 
And you thought the only reason to save your canceled checks was to prepare for an IRS audit . 
Reggie Jackson , the retired baseball star , has found another use for them . 
Mr. Jackson , who won the nickname `` Mr. October '' for his World Series exploits , is selling some of his canceled checks to autograph collectors through a dealer for as much as $ 500 each . 
Dealers say the budding trade in Mr. Jackson 's canceled checks is unusual . 
`` I do n't know of any living ballplayer that 's ever done it , '' says Jack Smalling , a dealer in Ames , Iowa , and a recognized expert in the field of baseball autographs . 
An initial batch of Mr. Jackson 's checks was on sale at a baseball-card show held in San Francisco over Labor Day weekend . 
Mr. Jackson showed up at the affair to sign autographs for a fee as well . 
`` For someone who has everything else -- Reggie 's jersey , cap and cards -- his checks might be a nice addition , '' says William Vizas , owner of Bill 's Sports Collectibles in Denver , who examined the checks at the San Francisco card show . 
For years , the canceled checks of a small number of well-known baseball players have been bought and sold . 
But these players were dead . 
`` Maybe three years ago , there were a lot of { Ty } Cobbs in the hobby , and awhile back there were Babe Ruth checks , '' says Mr. Smalling . 
However , the thought of a living player selling his checks rubs some people the wrong way . 
`` Maybe I 'm a little stuffy , but I would n't sell them , '' sniffs Bob Machon , owner of Papa 's Sports Cards in Menlo Park , Calif . 
`` Who knows how much they 'll be worth 100 years from now ? '' 
And Mr. Smalling does n't believe they 're worth all that much now . 
`` I do n't think the checks are worth $ 15 apiece , '' he says . 
Why Mr. Jackson , who could n't be reached for comment , has made some of his checks available for sale is n't clear . 
He probably has n't done it for the cash . 
`` I would say he 's definitely not in need of money , '' says Matt Merola , an agent of Mr. Jackson 's based in New York . 
`` He has good investments . '' 
And Mr. Jackson probably has opened new checking accounts , too . 
Or at least he should . 
`` I assume those accounts are closed , '' says Mr. Smalling , referring to the accounts of the canceled checks . 
`` I do n't think he 'd want to give out his current account numbers . 
USX Corp. and its Japanese partner , Kobe Steel Ltd. , agreed to form a joint venture to build a new plant to produce hot-dipped galvanized sheet products , mainly for the automotive market . 
Terms were n't disclosed for the plant , which will have annual capacity of 600,000 tons . 
The move by the nation 's largest steelmaker follows a string of earlier announcements by other major steel companies . 
Bethlehem Steel Corp. , LTV Corp. and Armco Inc. all have plans to build additional lines for such coated corrosion-resistant steel . 
The surge in production , analysts say , raises questions about capacity outpacing demand . 
They note that most of the new plants will come on line in 1992 , when the current import trade restraint program ends , which could result in more imports . 
`` There 's too much capacity , '' contended Charles Bradford , an analyst with Merrill Lynch Capital Markets . 
`` I do n't think there 's anyone not building one . '' 
He does add , however , that transplanted Japanese car makers are boosting the levels of U.S.-made steel in their autos , instead of relying heavily on imported steel . 
That trend could increase demand for hot-dipped galvanized sheet . 
The hot-dipped galvanized segment is one of the fastest-growing and most profitable segments of the steel market , coveted by all major integrated steelmakers wanting to maintain an edge over smaller minimills and reconstructed mills -- those spun off to employees . 
Indeed , USX said it expects the market for coated sheet steel to reach 12 million tons annually by 1992 , compared with 10.2 million tons shipped in 1988 . 
For the first eight months of 1989 , analysts say shipments of hot-dipped galvanized steel increased about 8 % from a year earlier , while overall steel shipments were up only 2.4 % . 
USX and Kobe Steel hope to reach a definitive agreement establishing the 50-50 partnership by the end of the year , with construction tentatively slated for the spring of 1990 and production by 1992 . 
USX already has six lines in existing plants producing hot-dipped galvanized steel , but this marks the first so-called greenfield plant for such production . 
Moreover , it will boost by 50 % USX 's current hot-dipped capacity of 1,275,000 tons . 
The company said it does n't expect the new line 's capacity to adversely affect the company 's existing hot-dipped galvanizing lines . 
Steelmakers have also been adding capacity of so-called electrogalvanized steel , which is another way to make coated corrosion-resistant steel . 
One of the advantages of the hot-dipped process is that it allows the steel to be covered with a thicker coat of zinc more quickly . 
ONCE YOU MAKE UP your mind about an investment , the rest is easy , right ? 
You just call your broker and say `` buy '' or `` sell . '' 
Dream on . 
There are all sorts of ways to give buy and sell instructions to a broker -- and just as many ways to get burned if you do n't know what you 're doing . 
So here 's a rundown of the most common types of market orders permitted by the stock and commodity exchanges . 
Two things to keep in mind : Not all exchanges accept every type of order . 
And even when a specific order is acceptable to an exchange , a brokerage firm can refuse to enter it for a customer . 
Market Order : This is probably the most widely used order -- and the one most open to abuse by unscrupulous floor brokers , since it imposes no price restrictions . 
With a market order , an investor tells a broker to buy or sell `` at the market . '' 
It 's like saying , `` get me in now '' or `` get me out now . '' 
For example , if wheat is being offered at $ 4.065 and bid at $ 4.060 , a market order to buy would be filled at the higher price and a market order to sell at the lower price . 
A recent indictment alleges that some floor brokers at the two largest Chicago commodity exchanges used market orders to fill customers ' orders at unfavorable prices by arranging trades with fellow brokers . 
Profits realized from these trades would then be shared by the conspiring brokers . 
Limit Order : Limit orders are used when investors want to restrict the amount they will receive or pay for an investment . 
Investors do this by specifying a minimum price at which the investment may be sold or the maximum price that may be paid for it . 
Suppose an investor wants to sell a stock , but not for less than $ 55 . 
A limit order to sell could be entered at that price . 
One risk : Investors may regret the restriction if the stock reaches 54 and then falls . 
Unless the market goes at least one tick ( the smallest price increment permitted ) beyond the limit price , investors are n't assured of having their orders filled because there may not be sufficient trading volume to permit filling it at the specified price . 
Stop Order : Stop orders tell a floor broker to buy or sell an investment once the price reaches a certain level . 
Once the price reaches that level , a stop order turns into a market order , and the order is filled at whatever price the broker can get . 
Stop orders are sometimes called `` stop-loss '' orders because they are frequently used to protect profits or limit losses . 
While stop orders sound similar to limit orders , there is a difference : Sell stops must be entered at a price below the current market price and buy stops above . 
In contrast , sell limit orders must be placed above the market price and buy limit orders are placed below . 
The crash in October 1987 and last Friday 's sell-off painfully taught some investors exactly what stop orders will and wo n't do . 
An investor who may have placed a stop-loss order at $ 90 under a stock that was trading at $ 100 a share on the Friday before the crash was stunned to discover that the order was filled at $ 75 when the stock opened at that price on Monday . 
Stop-Limit Order : Stop-limit orders turn into limit orders when an investment trades at the price specified in the order . 
Unlike stop orders -- which are filled at the market price when the stop price is hit -- stop-limit orders demand that the trades be made only at the specified price . 
If it ca n't be made at that price , it does n't get filled . 
Investors who wish to be out of a position , without the risk of receiving a worse-than-expected price from a market order , may use this type of order to specify the price at which the order must be filled . 
But if the market moves quickly enough , it may be impossible for the broker to carry out the order because the investment has passed the specified price . 
Market-If-Touched Order : Market-if-touched orders are like stop orders in that they become market orders if a specified price is reached . 
However , unlike a buy-stop order , a buy market-if-touched order is entered at a price below the current price , while a sell market-if-touched order is entered at a price above it . 
As soon as the market trades at the specified price the floor broker will fill it at the best possible price . 
Fill-Or-Kill Order : The fill-or-kill order is one of several associated with the timing of trades . 
It instructs a broker to buy or sell an investment at the specified price or better . 
But if the investment ca n't be bought or sold immediately , the order is automatically canceled . 
Gregory Bessemer , who came in second in the stock division of the recently completed U.S. Trading Championship , says he uses fill-or-kill orders almost exclusively when trading options . 
`` I like to use them to feel out the market , '' he says . 
`` If they do n't fill it immediately , then I can start over at a new price or try again with the same price . '' 
Not-Held Order : This is another timing order . 
It is a market order that allows floor brokers to take more time to buy or sell an investment , if they think they can get a better price by waiting . 
Not-held orders , which are also known as `` disregard the tape '' orders , are always done at the customer 's risk . 
One-Cancels-The-Other Order : This is really two orders in one , generally for the same security or commodity , instructing floor brokers to fill whichever order they can first and then cancel the other order . 
In a fast-moving market , it prevents an investor from getting stuck with having made two trades on the same security . 
Specific-Time Order : This type of order couples many of the orders described above with instructions that the order must be carried out at or by a certain time . 
`` On the close '' can be added to many types of orders . 
For example , `` market-on-close orders '' must be filled during the last few minutes of trading for the day at a price that is within the official closing range of prices as determined by the exchange . 
`` Stop-close-only orders '' are stop orders that only become active during the closing minutes of trading . 
`` Day orders '' expire at the end of the day on which they are entered , `` good-till-canceled orders '' have no expiration date . 
Most brokers assume that all orders are day orders unless specified otherwise . 
On Oct. 19 , 1987 , some investors learned the consequences of entering `` good-til-canceled limit orders '' and then forgetting about them . 
They found they had bought stock from limit orders that they might have entered weeks or months earlier and had forgotten to cancel . 
It is always the responsibility of investors to keep track of the orders they have placed . 
Investors who change their mind about buying or selling after an order has been filled are , usually , stuck with the consequences . 
Mr. Angrist writes on the options and commodities markets for The Wall Street Journal . 
IN SIZING UP the risks of stock-market investments , there 's probably no starting place better than `` beta . '' 
But investors better not ignore its limitations , either . 
Beta is a handy gauge that measures the volatility of a stock or stock mutual fund . 
For any given move in the overall market , it suggests how steeply that particular issue might rise or fall . 
Beta figures are widely available and easy to interpret . 
The beta of the broad market , typically defined as the Standard & Poor 's 500-stock index , is always 1.0 . 
So a stock with a beta of 0.5 is half as volatile , one at 1.5 is 50 % more volatile , and so on . 
Cautious investors should generally go with stocks that have low betas . 
Go with high-beta stocks to get the biggest payoff from a bet on a bull market . 
Remember , though , that beta also has important limitations . 
`` Beta is only part of the risk in a stock , '' says William F. Sharpe , the Stanford University emeritus professor who developed the measure . 
`` There is risk that is not associated with market moves , and the beta does n't tell you the magnitude of that . '' 
In particular , beta does n't measure the company - and industry-specific risk associated with an individual stock . 
That `` business '' risk is very significant for an investor with only a few stocks , but it virtually disappears in a large and well-diversified portfolio . 
Beta is also a poor indicator of the risk in stock groups that march to their own drummer . 
In particular , the prices of gold and other precious-metals stocks shoot up and down , but the stocks tend to have low betas because their moves are not market-inspired . 
Concern that investors could misinterpret such readings led the American Association of Individual Investors to eliminate beta figures for precious-metals funds in the 1989 edition of its mutual-fund guide . 
`` Our fear was people would look just at the beta { of a gold fund } and say here is an investment with very low risk , '' says John Markese , director of research for the Chicago-based group . 
`` In reality it 's very volatile , but the movements are not because of market movements . 
READY TO REVIEW the riskiness of your investment portfolio ? 
First , a pop quiz . 
When you think of the words `` risk '' and `` investment , '' what 's the specific peril that comes to mind ? 
Pencils down . 
If you 're like most people , you said it 's a holding that goes completely sour -- maybe a bond that defaults or a stock whose value disappears in a bankruptcy proceeding . 
`` People tend to see risk primarily on that one dimension , '' says Timothy Kochis , national director of personal financial planning for accountants Deloitte , Haskins & Sells . 
But therein lies another aspect of investment risk : the hazard of shaping your portfolio to avoid one or more types of risk and being blind-sided by others . 
This is clearly not good news to all you people who sleep like babies every night , lulled by visions of your money sitting risk-free in six-month CDs . 
Risk wears many disguises , and investments that are low in one type of obvious risk can be distressingly high in other , less obvious kinds . 
U.S. Treasury bonds , for example , are supersafe when it comes to returning money at maturity . 
But their value as investments can be decimated by inflation , which erodes the purchasing power of bonds ' fixed-dollar interest payments . 
Risk is also a function of time . 
When financial professionals measure risk mathematically , they usually focus on the volatility of short-term returns . 
Stocks are much riskier than Treasury bills , for example , because the range in performance from the best years to the worst is much wider . 
That is usually measured by the standard deviation , or divergence , of annual results from the average return over time . 
But investors who are preoccupied with short-term fluctuations may be paying too little attention to another big risk -- not generating enough money to meet long-term financial and life-style goals . 
For instance , some investors have sworn off stocks since the 1987 market crash ; last Friday 's debacle only reinforced those feelings . 
But the stock market , despite some stomach-churning declines , has far outperformed other securities over extended periods . 
By retreating to the apparent security of , say , money-market funds , investors may not be earning enough investment return to pay for a comfortable retirement . 
`` That 's the biggest risk of all -- the risk of not meeting your objectives , '' says Steven B. Enright , a New York financial planner with Seidman Financial Services . 
As a result , financial advisers say they take several steps when evaluating the riskiness of clients ' portfolios . 
They estimate the return a person 's current portfolio is likely to generate over time , along with a standard deviation that suggests how much the return will vary year by year . 
They try to figure out the long-term results the person needs to meet major goals . 
And they eyeball types of risk that are not easily quantified . 
The portfolios of two hypothetical families , one a couple at retirement age and another a two-income couple at age 45 , illustrate several types of risk that investors need to consider . 
For instance , the insured municipal bonds that dominate the older couple 's portfolio were probably selected in large part for their low repayment risk . 
But they expose the holders to a lot of inflation risk and interest-rate risk . 
The younger couple 's stockholdings involve more risk than a diversified stock portfolio because the bulk of the money is in a single issue . 
Note that the younger couple 's portfolio has a higher expected annual return , 10.1 % vs. 8.8 % , as calculated by Seidman Financial Services , which is the financial-planning affiliate of BDO Seidman . 
That largely reflects the heavy stockholdings . 
But one price paid for the higher expected return is greater short-term volatility , as reflected in the higher standard deviation that Seidman estimates for the younger couple 's portfolio . 
( Here 's how to interpret a standard deviation figure : Take the expected return and add one standard deviation to it . 
Then take the expected return and subtract one standard deviation . 
In two of three years , the actual result should fall within that range if all the assumptions were accurate . 
Then add and subtract two standard deviations to get a wider range . 
There 's a 95 % probability any year 's result will fall in the range . ) 
Of course , the greater volatility of the younger couple 's portfolio does n't necessarily mean those investments are riskier in terms of meeting the holders ' long-term goals . 
Indeed , the older couple 's portfolio could actually be riskier in that sense if the expected return wo n't generate enough dollars to meet their spending plans . 
`` They may feel emotionally secure now because they are not heavily in the stock market , '' says John H. Cammack , a financial planner with Alexandra Armstrong Advisors Inc. in Washington . 
`` But they may pay a price 10 or 20 years in the future . '' 
Ms. Slater reports on personal finance from The Wall Street Journal 's New York bureau . 
When it comes to investing , trying to weigh risk and reward can seem like throwing darts blindfolded : Investors do n't know the actual returns that securities will deliver , or the ups and downs that will occur along the way . 
Looking to the past can provide some clues . 
Over several decades , for instance , investors who put up with the stock market 's gyrations earned returns far in excess of those on bonds and `` cash '' investments like Treasury bills . 
But while history can suggest what is reasonable to expect there 's no guarantee that the past will repeat itself . 
For instance , some analysts believe bond returns and volatility have moved permanently closer to those of the stock market . 
And returns on cash investments may continue to exceed inflation by a wider margin than they did over the long-term past . 
Portfolio A : Retired couple , age 65 ; $ 400,000 portfolio . 
Portfolio B : Two-income couple , age 45 ; $ 150,000 portfolio . 
A letter from Senator John Kerry chides us today for implying that he had `` flip-flopped '' on Manuel Noriega . 
He correctly says he has been down on Noriega for some time , hence his criticism of administration mishandling of the attempted coup . 
Our October 12 editorial should have been more precise . 
It meant to convey our hope that the Senator and other members of the congressional left are broadening their dislike of Noriega to include other notorious Central American drug runners . 
The Sandinistas of Nicaragua , for example , also are part of the Castro-Medellin cartel nexus . 
In his letter and on the basis of his losing vote Tuesday against U.S. aid for the Nicaraguan opposition , Senator Kerry makes clear he has not made that intellectual leap . 
We were wrong . 
THROUGHOUT THE 1980s , investors have been looking for creative alternatives to traditional modes of financial planning . 
Capital has been democratized , and people want in . 
Too often , however , small investors are left with the same stale solutions that appealed to previous generations of fiduciary strategists . 
Now a startling new approach is available to building your financial portfolio without undue risk , without extensive planning and without hurting your life style one bit ! 
This is particularly good news for those who hate risk , who are incapable of doing extensive amounts of planning and who refuse to see their life styles hurt in any way . 
You know who you are . 
My revolutionary system is also useful for those who have tried customary forms of growing their currency cushion . 
Like all Americans seeking chronic prosperity , I do find it necessary to plunge certain funds into conservative monetary tools , if only to assuage my father-in-law , who believes in such things . 
So throughout the decade I have maintained my share of individual retirement accounts and CDs , and tinkered with stocks , bonds and mutual funds , as well as preserving my necessary position in the residential real-estate market . 
Return on this fine portfolio has been modest when it has not been negative . 
Figure 1 demonstrates the performance of those businesses I 've invested in during this prosperous decade ( see accompanying illustration -- WSJ Oct. 20 , 1989 ) . 
Oil-related properties suffered a huge decline until I divested myself of all such stocks in 1985 , at which point the industry , while not lighting up any Christmas trees , began a slow recovery . 
Likewise , mutual funds remained relatively flat until I made what was , for me , a serious investment . 
By 1987 , these properties were in a tailspin , causing my broker at Pru-Bache to remark that she 'd `` never seen anything like it . '' 
Concerned for her state of mind , I dropped them -- and the market instantly began its steady climb back to health . 
Perhaps most dramatic was the performance of the metropolitan New York real-estate market , which was booming until I entered it in late 1988 , at which time it posted the first negative compound annual growth rate in years . 
Disgusted , I cast around for a different way to plan my asset distribution , and with hardly any heavy breathing the answer struck me : I was doing it already ! 
We 've all got money to spend , some of it clearly disposable since we keep disposing of it . 
Bank it ? 
Not really ! 
Sock it away in long-term instruments ? 
Nonsense ! 
Daily living is the best possible investment ! 
Your priorities may be different , but here in Figure 2 is where I 've chosen to build for the future : personal space ; automotive pursuits ; children 's toys ; gardening equipment , bulbs and shrubs ; and finally , entertainment , perhaps the best investment of all . 
All have paid off for me in double-digit annual growth and continue to provide significant potential . 
At least , according to my calculations . 
Personal space ( Figure 3 ) has grown 35 % annually over the course of the decade , a performance that would compare positively with an investment in , say , synthetic-leather products for the interiors of cold-weather vehicles , which my cousin got into and sort of regrets to this day . 
The assortment of expensive children 's toys that I have purchased wisely at a host of discount-toy brokerage firms ( Figure 4 ) has increased handsomely in total asset value far beyond any personal investment except , perhaps , for my record collection , whose worth , I think it 's safe to say , is incalculable . 
Continued investment in my 1984 subcompact has been part of my strategy ( Figure 5 ) , with present annual contributions now equaling more than 60 % of the car 's original value . 
According to my calculations , these outlays should have brought the value of my sedan to more than $ 22,000 on the open market ( Figure 6 ) , where I plan to offer it shortly . 
Expansion of my living space has produced an obvious need for maintenance and construction of suitable lawns , shrubs and bushes fitting to its suburban locale . 
I have thus committed sufficient personal outlay to ensure that my grounds and lodgings will never be short of greens and flowers . 
My initial stake in this blooming enterprise has grown tenfold , according to my conservative calculations . 
At the same time , my share in a wide variety of entertainment pursuits has given perhaps the most dramatic demonstration of the benefits of creative personal financial planning . 
Over the course of the decade , for instance , my return on investment in the area of poker alone ( Figures 7A and 7B ) has been most impressive , showing bodacious annual expansion with -- given the way my associates play -- no sign of abatement into the 1990s and beyond . 
With this personal strategy firmly in place , I look forward to years of fine life-style investments and increasing widespread leverage . 
My kids ' college education looms as perhaps the greatest future opportunity for spending , although I 'll probably have to cash in their toy portfolio to take advantage of it . 
But with every step I take , I 'm building wealth . 
You can , too , if you , like me , refuse to bite the bullet . 
So go out there and eat that debt . 
You 're right there in the mainstream of American business , building value on the back of insupportable expenditures . 
Henry Kravis , watch out ! 
Mr. Schwartz is a business executive and writer in New York . 
WHEN JAMES SCHWARTZ was just a lad his father gave him a piece of career advice . 
`` He told me to choose an area where just by being mediocre I could be great , '' recalls Mr. Schwartz , now 40 . 
He tried management consulting , traded in turquoise for a while , and even managed professional wrestlers . 
Now he has settled into a career that fits the bill -- financial planning . 
It should be noted that Mr. Schwartz , who operates out of Englewood , Colo. , is a puckish sort who likes to give his colleagues the needle . 
But in this case the needle has a very sharp point . 
Though it 's probably safe to assume that the majority of financial planners are honest and even reasonably competent , the fact remains that , as one wag puts it , `` anybody who can fog a mirror '' can call himself a financial planner . 
Planners now influence the investment of several hundred billion dollars , but in effect they operate in the dark . 
There is no effective regulation of planners , no accepted standard for admission into their ranks -- a dog got into one trade group -- no way to assess their performance , no way even to know how many of them there are ( estimates range from 60,000 to 450,000 ) . 
All anyone need do is hang up a shingle and start planning . 
So it should come as no shock that the profession , if that 's what it is , has attracted a lot of people whose principal talents seem to be frittering away or flat-out stealing their clients ' money . 
Alarmed , state and federal authorities are trying to devise ways to certify and regulate planners . 
Industry groups and reputable planners who are members of them want comprehensive standards , too ; they 're tired of seeing practitioners depicted collectively in the business press as dumber than chimpanzees and greedier than a herd of swine . 
But reform has n't taken hold yet . 
`` The industry is still pretty much in its Wild West days , '' says Scott Stapf , director of investor education for the North American Securities Administrators Association . 
An admittedly limited survey by NASAA , whose members are state securities-law regulators , found that between 1986 and 1988 `` fraud and abuse '' by financial planners cost 22,000 investors $ 400 million . 
The rogues ' gallery of planners involved includes some convicted felons , a compulsive gambler or two , various businessmen who had planned their own previous ventures right into bankruptcy , and one man who scammed his wife 's grandmother . 
What 's more , the losses they and the others caused `` are just what we are stumbling over , '' says Mr. Stapf , adding that the majority of misdeeds probably go undetected . 
So do just about all the losses that could be attributed to the sheer incompetence of unqualified planners . 
Nobody can estimate the toll , but John Gargan , a Tampa , Fla. , planner and head of one trade group , the International Association of Registered Financial Planners , thinks the danger to investors from incompetence is `` humongous , '' far greater than that from crookery . 
His group , like others , wants minimum standards applied to all who call themselves financial planners . 
Surveying all this , some people now think the best planner might be no planner at all . 
For most investors `` the benefits just are n't worth the risks , '' says Barbara Roper , who follows financial-planning issues for the Consumer Federation of America , a consumer-advocacy organization based in Washington . 
She concedes that such a position is `` unfair '' to the thousands of conscientious and qualified people plying the trade , but as a consumer advocate she feels impelled to take it . 
She says her group used to give tips on selecting planners -- check educational and experience credentials , consult regulators and Better Business Bureaus -- but found that even some people who took these steps `` were still getting ripped off . '' 
The bad news , however , has n't been bad enough to kill the growing demand for financial planning . 
The Tax Reform Act of 1986 , which eliminated many tax shelters peddled by planners , and the stock market crash the next year did cause a sharp slump in such demand , and many planners had to make an unplanned exit from the business . 
But membership in the International Association of Financial Planners ( IAFP ) , the industry 's biggest trade group , is still nearly triple what it was in 1980 , and it 's believed that the ranks of planners who do n't belong to any group have soared as well . 
An estimated 10 million Americans are now using financial planners , and the pool of capital they influence is enormous . 
A survey of 54,000 of them conducted by the IAFP in April showed that these practitioners alone had controlled or guided the investment of $ 154 billion of their clients ' money in the previous 12 months . 
The sheer number of planners makes the business extremely difficult , if not impossible , to regulate . 
Even the minority of them who must register with the Securities and Exchange Commission as `` investment advisers '' -- people who are in the business of counseling others on the buying and selling of securities specifically -- have been enough to swamp the agency 's capacity . 
The SEC has only about 200 staffers assigned to keep tabs on investment advisers -- about the same as in 1980 -- even though the number of advisers has tripled to about 15,000 over the past decade . 
Currently , a registered investment adviser can expect an SEC audit only once every 12 years . 
A lot of bad things can happen in 12 years . 
`` It does n't take a rocket scientist to figure out our problem , '' says Kathryn McGrath , director of the SEC 's division of investment management . 
So the SEC has proposed to Congress that much of the job of oversight be turned over to an industry-funded , self-regulatory organization patterned on the National Association of Securities Dealers , which operates in the brokerage business . 
Such an organization could , among other things , set minimum standards for competence , ethics and finances and punish those investment advisers who broke the rules . 
The proposal has set off a lively debate within an industry that was far from united to begin with . 
Mr. Schwartz , the puckish planner from Englewood , Colo. , says that allowing the business to police itself would be `` like putting Dracula in charge of the blood bank . '' 
Mr. Gargan , the Tampa planner who heads one trade group , favors simply assessing the industry and giving the money to the SEC to hire more staff . 
( Mr. Gargan 's views are not greeted with wild enthusiasm over at the IAFP , the major industry organization . 
When the IAFP recently assembled other industry groups to discuss common standards that might be applied to planners , Mr. Gargan 's group was excluded . 
That may be because Mr. Gargan , smarting at what he considered slurs on his membership standards made by the rival group , enrolled his dog , Beauregard , as a member of the IAFP . 
Then he sent the pooch 's picture with the certificate of membership -- it was made out to `` Boris ` Bo ' Regaard '' -- to every newspaper he could think of . ) 
The states have their own ideas about regulation and certification . 
NASAA , the organization of state securities regulators , is pushing for a model regulatory statute already adopted in eight states . 
It requires financial planners to register with states , pass competency tests and reveal to customers any conflicts of interest . 
The most common conflict involves compensation . 
NASAA estimates that nearly 90 % of planners receive some or all of their income from sales commissions on securities , insurance and other financial products they recommend . 
The issue : Is the planner putting his clients into the best investments , or the ones that garner the biggest commissions ? 
In 1986 the New York attorney general 's office got an order from a state court in Albany shutting down First Meridian Corp. , an Albany financial-planning firm that had invested $ 55 million on behalf of nearly 1,000 investors . 
In its notice of action , the attorney general said the company had promised to put clients into `` balanced '' investment portfolios ; instead , the attorney general alleged , the company consistently shoved unwary customers into high-risk investments in paintings , coins and Florida condos . 
Those investments paid big commissions to First Meridian , payments investors were never told about , the attorney general alleged . 
Investors were further assured that only those with a minimun net worth would be accepted . 
In practice , the attorney general alleged in an affidavit , if an investor had access to cash `` the chances of being turned down by First Meridian were about as probable as being rejected by the Book-of-the-Month Club . '' 
And , the attorney general added , First Meridian 's president , Roger V. Sala , portrayed himself as a `` financial expert '' when his qualifications largely consisted of a high-school diploma , work as a real-estate and insurance salesman , and a stint as supervisor at a highway toll booth . 
First Meridian and its officials are currently under investigation for possible criminal wrongdoing , according to a spokeswoman for the attorney general . 
Harry Manion , Mr. Sala 's attorney , says his client denies any wrongdoing and adds that the attorney general 's contentions about First Meridian 's business practices are incorrect . 
As for Mr. Sala 's qualifications , `` the snooty attorneys for the state of New York decided Mr. Sala was n't qualified because he did n't have a Harvard degree , '' says Mr. Manion . 
Civil suits against planners by clients seeking recovery of funds are increasingly common . 
Two such actions , both filed earlier this year in Georgia state court in Atlanta , could be particularly embarrassing to the industry : both name J. Chandler Peterson , an Atlanta financial planner who is a founder and past chairman of the IAFP , as defendant . 
One suit , filed by more than three dozen investors , charges that Mr. Peterson misused much of the $ 9.7 million put into a limited partnership that he operated and promoted , spending some of it to pay his own legal bills and to invest in other companies in which he had an interest . 
Those companies , in turn , paid Mr. Peterson commissions and fees , the suit alleges . 
The other suit was filed by two men in a dispute over $ 100,000 investments each says he made with Mr. Peterson as part of an effort to purchase the Bank of Scottsdale in Scottsdale , Ariz . 
One plaintiff , a doctor , testified in an affidavit that he also gave Mr. Peterson $ 50,000 to join a sort of investment club which essentially gave the physician `` the privilege of making additional investments '' with Mr. Peterson . 
In affidavits , each plaintiff claims Mr. Peterson promised the bank purchase would be completed by the end of 1988 or the money returned . 
Mr. Peterson took the plaintiffs ' and other investors ' money to a meeting of the bank 's directors . 
Wearing a business suit and western-style hat and boots , he opened up his briefcase and dumped $ 1 million in cash on a table in front of the directors , says Myron Diebel , the bank 's president . 
`` He said he wanted to show the color of his money , '' recalls Mr. Diebel . 
Bank officials , however , showed him the door , and the sale never came off . 
According to the suit , Mr. Peterson has yet to return the plaintiffs ' investment . 
They want it back . 
Mr. Peterson declines to comment on specific allegations in the two suits , saying he prefers to save such responses for court . 
But he does say that all of his activities have been `` entirely proper . '' 
On the suit by the limited partners , he says he is considering a defamation suit against the plaintiffs . 
The suit , he adds , `` is almost in the nature of a vendetta by a handful of disgruntled people . '' 
Rearding the suit over the bank bid , Mr. Peterson says it is filled with `` inflammatory language and half truths . '' 
He declines to go into specifics . 
Mr. Peterson says the suits against him are less a measure of his work than they are a `` sign of the times '' in which people generally are more prone to sue . 
`` I do n't know anybody in the industry who has n't experienced litigation , '' he says . 
Mr. Peterson also says he does n't consider himself a financial planner anymore . 
He now calls himself an `` investment banker . '' 
In many scams or alleged scams involving planners , it 's plain that only a modicum of common sense on the part of the investors would have kept them out of harm 's way . 
Using it , would n't a proessional hesitate to pay tens of thousands of dollars just for a chance to invest witha planner ? 
Other cases go to show that an old saw still applies : If it sounds too good to be true , it probably is . 
Certificates of deposit do n't pay 23 % a year , for example , but that did n't give pause to clients of one Alabama planner . 
Now they 're losers and he 's in jail in Mobile County . 
CDs yielding 40 % are even more implausible -- especially when the issuing `` bank '' in the Marshall Islands is merely a mail drop watched over by a local gas-station operator -- but investors fell for that one too . 
And the Colorado planner who promised to make some of his clients millionaires on investments of as litle as $ 100 ? 
Never mind . 
You already know the answer . 
Mr. Emshwiller is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal 's Los Angeles bureau . 
At the ritzy Fashion Island Shopping Center , the tanned and elegant ladies of this wealthy Southern California beach community disembark from their Mercedes-Benzes and BMWs for another day of exercising their credit cards . 
They root among the designer offerings at Neiman-Marcus and Bullocks Wilshire . 
They stroll through the marble-encased corridors of the Atrium Court . 
They graze at the Farmers Market , a combination gourmet food court and grocery store , while a pianist accompanies the noon fashion show with a selection of dreamy melodies . 
`` The beautiful look of wool , '' croons the show 's narrator , `` slightly Victorian in its influence ... . '' 
Meanwhile , in the squat office buildings that ring Fashion Island , the odds are good that someone is getting fleeced . 
Law-enforcement authorities say that at any given time , a host of fraudulent telemarketing operations mingle with the many legitimate businesses here . 
`` They seem to like these industrial parks , '' says Kacy McClelland , a postal inspector who specializes in mail fraud . 
`` We call them fraud farms . '' 
Welcome to that welter of contradictions known as Newport Beach . 
This city of more than 70,000 is known for sunshine , yachts and rich residents . 
It is also known as the fraud capital of the U.S. , dubbed by investigators and the media as the `` Cote de Fraud '' . 
How does a community famous for its high living end up as a haven for low-lifes ? 
Clearly , the existence of the former lures the latter . 
The places renowned for breeding bunco , like the Miami neighborhood known as the `` Maggot Mile '' and Las Vegas 's flashy strip of casinos , invariably offer fast cars , high rollers , glamorous women and lots of sunshine . 
You do n't hear much about unusual concentrations of fraud in Green Bay or Buffalo . 
Con men hate snow . 
Newport Beach fits the scam artists ' specifications perfectly . 
What more could a con man in search of the easy life ask for ? 
Nothing seems hard here . 
The breezes are soft , the waves lap gently and the palm trees sway lazily . 
Nightlife is plentiful . 
Moreover , ostentation is appreciated . 
The median price of homes is $ 547,000 ; more than 9,000 vessels fill what the chamber of commerce calls the nation 's largest pleasure-boat harbor . 
`` Blondes , cocaine and Corvettes , '' mutters Mr. McClelland . 
`` That 's what they 're after . '' 
The rich image of Newport Beach also helps lend the con artists ' operation an air of respectability . 
`` One reason they use Newport Beach is that it sounds swankier than most addresses , '' says David Katz , a U.S. attorney who , until recently , headed a multi-agency Southern California fraud task force . 
`` Newport Beach is known in Rhode Island for having a lot of rich people . '' 
No wonder all kinds of big-time scams have flourished here , from phony tax-sheltered Bible sales to crooked car dealers to bogus penny-stock traders . 
But above all , this is the national headquarters for boiler-room operators , those slick-talking snake-oil salesmen who use the telephone to extract money from the gullible and the greedy and then vanish . 
Because only a fraction of them are ever prosecuted , nobody really knows how much money bogus telemarketing operators really harvest . 
`` I 've heard that there is $ 40 billion taken in nationwide by boiler rooms every year , '' Mr. McClelland says . 
`` If that 's true , Orange County has to be at least 10 % of that . '' 
And most of the truly big scams in Orange County seem to originate in Newport Beach or one of the other well-heeled communities that surround this sliver-like city that hooks around a point of land on the California coast south of Los Angeles . 
In fact , sophisticated big-bucks boiler-room scams are known generically among law-enforcement types as `` Newport Beach '' operations . 
That contrasts with the penny-ante sales of things such as pen-and-pencil sets and office supplies that are known as `` Hollywood '' scams . 
Newport Beach telemarketers concentrate on precious metals and oil-leasing deals that typically cost thousands of dollars a shot . 
The investors range from elderly widows to affluent professionals . 
In one ingenious recent example of a Newport Beach boiler room , prospective investors in Capital Trust Inc. were allegedly told that their investment in precious metals was insured against losses `` caused by employees due to dishonesty , destruction or disappearance , '' according to an indictment handed up by a federal grand jury in Los Angeles last month . 
Thus falsely reassured , investors sent $ 11.4 million to the Newport Beach company , most of which was diverted to unauthorized uses , the indictment charges . 
Douglas Jones , an attorney representing Richard O. Kelly Sr. , the chairman and president of Capital Trust , says his client denies that there was any attempt to defraud investors . 
`` There were some business deals that went bad , '' Mr. Jones says , `` but no intent to defraud . '' 
Newport Beach operations differ from the Hollywood boiler rooms in style as well as in dollars . 
Traditionally , boiler rooms operate on the cheap , since few , if any , customers ever visit their offices . 
Indeed , the name derives from the tendency among telemarketing scammers to rent cheap basement space , near the boiler room . 
But , says Mr. Katz , the U.S. attorney , `` the interesting thing about Newport Beach operations is that they give themselves the indulgence of beautiful offices , with plush furnishings . 
When we go there , it 's quite different from these Hollywood places where the sandwiches are spread out on the table and the people are picking their noses . '' 
The Newport Beach operators also tend to indulge themselves privately . 
Investigators cite the case of Matthew Valentine , who is currently serving a six-year sentence at Lompoc Federal Prison for his role in Intech Investment Corp. , which promised investors returns of as much as 625 % on precious metals . 
Mr. Valentine , who pleaded guilty to five counts of fraud in federal court in Los Angeles , drove a leased Mercedes and lived in an expensive home on Lido Isle , an island in Newport 's harbor , according to investigators . 
With the $ 3 million received from investors , he took frequent junkets with friends to exotic locales and leased an expensive BMW for his girlfriend , whom he met at the shop where he got his custom-tailored suits . 
`` It 's amazing the amount of money that goes up their nose , out to the dog track or to the tables in Las Vegas , '' Mr. Katz says . 
All this talk of boiler rooms and fraud is unnerving to the city 's legitimate business element . 
Vincent M Ciavarella , regional manager of Property Management Systems , insists he does n't know of any bogus telemarketers operating in the 1.6 million square feet of office space around Fashion Island that his company leases for Irvine Co. , the owner and developer of the project . 
Mr. Ciavarella has rejected a few prospective tenants who provided `` incomplete '' financial information and acknowledges that illegitimate operators `` are not easily detectable . 
'' ( Investigators stress that building owners are victims , too , since boiler rooms often leave without paying rent . ) 
Richard Luehrs , president of the Newport Harbor Area Chamber of Commerce , calls boiler rooms a `` negative we wish we could get rid of . '' 
Actually , `` we do n't get much negative publicity about this , '' he insists , `` except for the press who write about it . '' 
Mr. Lancaster is deputy chief of The Wall Street Journal 's Dallas bureau . 
YOU WENT to college and thought you got an education . 
Now you discover that you never learned the most important lesson : How to send your kids to college . 
True , when you went to college , there was n't that much to learn . 
Stick some money in an interest-bearing account and watch it grow . 
Now , investment salesmen say it 's time to take some risks if you want the kind of returns that will buy your toddler a ticket to Prestige U. in 18 years . 
In short , throw away the passbook and go for the glory . 
The reason is cost . 
Nothing in the annals of tuition readied parents for the 1980s . 
Tuitions at private colleges rose 154 % in the 10 years ended in June of this year ; that 's twice the 77 % increase in consumer prices for the same period . 
A year at Harvard now goes for $ 19,395 . 
By 2007 , when this year 's newborns hit campus , a four-year Ivy League sheepskin will cost $ 300,000 , give or take a few pizzas-with-everything at exam time . 
Stanford , MIT and other utmosts will cost no less . 
So what 's a parent to do ? 
Some investment advisers are suggesting , in effect , a bet on a start-up investment pool -- maybe even on margin . 
Others prefer deep-discount zero-coupon bonds . 
Still others say , Why not take a chance on a high-octane growth fund ? 
`` You 're not going to make it in a 5 % bank account , '' says James Riepe , director of mutual funds at T. Rowe Price . 
To get the necessary growth , adds Murray Ruffel , a marketing official at the Financial Programs mutual-fund group , `` you need to go to the stock market . '' 
In other words , a little volatility never hurt . 
It never hurt anyone , that is , unless the growth funds do n't grow when you need them to . 
Or the zero-coupon bonds turn out not to have been discounted deeply enough to pay your kid 's tuition . 
That 's the dilemma for today 's parent . 
Although many experts are advising risk , no one has a good answer for you if the risk does n't pay off . 
Help may be on the way . 
The antitrust division of the Justice Department is investigating the oddly similar tuition charges and increases among the top schools . 
Fear of the price police could help cool things off in the 1990s . 
And then there 's always State U . 
But parents ' craving for a top-rated education for their children is growing like their taste for fancy wheels and vintage wine . 
Belatedly aware of public concern , lawmakers and financial middlemen are working overtime to create and sell college savings and investment schemes . 
Their message , explicit or implicit , is that a good college will cost so much by whenever you want it that the tried and true wo n't do anymore . 
Forget about Treasury bills or a money-market fund . 
The latest wave of marketing is instructive . 
Several outfits -- including the Financial Programs , Franklin , and T. Rowe Price mutual-fund groups and the Edward D. Jones brokerage house -- are advertising `` college planner '' tables and charts that tell you how much you need to put aside regularly . 
The calculations generally rely on an after-tax rate of return of 8 % annually -- a rate historically obtainable by the individual in only one place , the stock market . 
Most of the mailers are free , but Denver-based Financial Programs sells , for $ 15 , a version customized to the age of the child and the college of choice . 
The figures are shocking . 
To build a nest egg that would pay for Stanford when a current first-grader reaches college age , parents would need to set aside $ 773.94 a month -- for 12 years . 
They can cut this to $ 691.09 a month if the investing keeps up through college . 
And they can further reduce the monthly amount if they start saving earlier -- when mother and child come home from the hospital . 
Plugging a cheaper college into the formulas still does n't generate an installment most people can live with . 
Using a recent average private-school cost of about $ 12,500 a year , T. Rowe Price 's planner prescribes $ 450 monthly if the plan begins when the child is six . 
Since the formula assumes an 8 % before-tax return in a mutual fund , there would also be $ 16,500 in taxes to pay over the 12 years . 
Not everyone is so pessimistic . 
`` People are basically peddling a lot of fear , '' says Arthur Hauptman , a consultant to the American Council on Education in Washington . 
He takes issue with projections that do n't factor in students ' own contribution , which reduces most parents ' burden substantially . 
Still , he says , `` it 's no bad thing '' if all the marketing prods people into putting aside a little more . 
`` The situation you want to avoid is having somebody not save anything and hope they 'll be able to do it out of current income , '' he says . 
`` That 's crazy . '' 
His advice : Do n't panic . 
Parents , he says , should aim at whatever regular investment sum they can afford . 
Half the amount that the investment tables suggest might be a good goal , he adds . 
That way , parents will reduce borrowings and outlays from current income when the time comes to pay tuition . 
Mr. Hauptman reckons that the best investment choice is mutual funds because they are managed and over time have nearly kept up with the broad stock averages . 
He favors either an all-stock fund or a balanced fund that mixes both stocks and bonds . 
In their anxiety , however , parents and other student benefactors are flocking to new schemes . 
They have laid out about $ 1 billion for so-called baccalaureate zero-coupon municipal bonds -- so far offered by Connecticut , Illinois , Virginia and eight other states . 
And they have bought about $ 500 million in prepaid-tuition plans , offered in Michigan , Florida and Wyoming . 
The prepaid plans take payment today -- usually at current tuitions or at a slight discount -- for a promise that tuition will be covered tomorrow . 
The baccalaureate bonds -- tax-free , offered in small denominations and usually containing a provision that they wo n't be called before maturity -- seem to be tailor-made for college savers . 
Like other zeros , they pay all their interest at maturity , meaning that buyers can time things so that their bonds pay off just when Junior graduates from high school . 
Their compounding effect is also alluring . 
In June , Virginia sold bonds for $ 268.98 that will pay $ 1,000 in 2009 . 
But Richard Anderson , head of the Forum for College Financing Alternatives , at Columbia University , a research group partly financed by the federal government , says zeros are particularly ill-suited . 
Their price falls further than that of other bonds when inflation and interest rates kick up . 
That wo n't matter if they are held to maturity , but if , for any reason , the parents need to sell them before then , there could be a severe loss of principal . 
Had zeros been available in 1972 and had parents bought a face amount equal to four years ' tuition at the time , aiming for their children 's 1988 enrollment , they would have been left with only enough to pay for two years , Mr. Anderson figures . 
Most other bonds , however , would probably not have fared much better . 
The prepaid plans may be a good bet , provided the guarantee of future tuition is secure . 
Issuing states generally limit the guarantees to in-state institutions , however , and buyers get refunds without much interest if the children do n't attend the specified schools . 
Two private groups are seeking Securities and Exchange Commission approval for plans that could be more broadly transferable . 
Mr. Anderson wants the prestige colleges to sponsor such a plan . 
The issue here may be the soundness of the guarantee . 
Prepayments , much like mutual-fund purchases , are pooled for investment . 
Sponsors are naturally counting on their ability to keep ahead of tuition inflation with investment returns . 
But buyers are essentially betting on a start-up investment fund with no track record -- and some have been encouraged to borrow to do so . 
One problem is that the Internal Revenue Service has decided that the investment earnings and gains of the sponsors ' funds are taxable . 
The colleges , as educational institutions , had hoped that would n't be the case . 
Based on historical rates of return , Mr. Anderson reckons a 100 % stock portfolio , indexed to the market , would have kept up with tuition and taxes in the 20th century . 
But sponsors might not pick the stocks that will match the market . 
And they 're leaning more toward fixed income , whose returns after tax have trailed tuition increases . 
`` I 'm not sure they 're going to make it work , '' says Mr. Anderson . 
What happens if the sponsors do n't have the cash to pay the tuitions ? 
Florida and Wyoming have backed up their guarantees with the full faith and credit of the state governments , meaning that taxpayers will pick up any slack . 
Not so Michigan . 
Its plan is set up as an independent agency . 
The state says there 's no worry -- investment returns , combined with fees and the gains from unused plans , will provide all the cash it needs . 
Mr. Putka covers education from The Wall Street Journal 's Boston bureau . 
If you start saving for your child 's eduction on Jan. 1 , 1990 , here 's the monthly sum you will need to invest to pay for four years at Yale , Notre Dame and University of Minnesota . 
Figures assume a 7 % annual rise in tuition , fees , room and board and an 8 % annual investment return . 
Note : These figures are only for mandatory charges and do n't include books , transportation etc . 
\* For in-state students 
Source : PaineWebber Inc . 
AMONG THE CATFISH farmers in the watery delta land of Humphreys County , Miss. , Allen D. Tharp of Isola was one of the best known and most enterprising . 
He sold quarter-inch fingerlings to stock other farmers ' ponds , and he bought back one-pound-or-so food-fish that he `` live-hauled '' to market along with his own whiskery crop . 
And he nearly always bought and sold for cash . 
Along the way , Mr. Tharp omitted a total of $ 1.5 million from his receipts reported on federal tax returns for three years . 
The returns landed in the hands of an Internal Revenue Service criminal investigator , Samuel James Baker . 
Mr. Baker interviewed or wrote to hundreds of catfish farmers , live-haulers and processors throughout the South before coming up with detailed estimates of purchases and sales , in pounds and dollars , by Mr. Tharp and others . 
Unknown to Mr. Tharp , he had fouled his net on a special IRS project to catch catfish farmers and haulers inclined to cheat on their taxes . 
Confronted with the evidence , Mr. Tharp pleaded guilty to one charge of filing a false return and was fined $ 5,000 and sentenced to 18 months in prison . 
He also owes a lot of back taxes , interest and civil fraud penalties . 
A lot of taxpayers out there are n't as paranoid as one might think . 
Federal and state tax enforcers develop many group targets for investigation , on the basis of occupation , high income , type of income , or some other characteristic that may signal an opportunity or tendency to hide income or exaggerate deductions . 
Many professions long have seemed to be targets because of the exotic or ludicrous efforts of some members to offset high income with fake losses from phony tax shelters : dentists who invested in dubiously dubbed foreign films or airline pilots who raised racehorses on their days off . 
Mail-order ministers have been squelched . 
Now , television and radio evangelists are under scrutiny . 
The IRS recently won part of its long-running battle with the Church of Scientology over exemptions when the U.S. Supreme Court held that members ' payments to the church were n't deductible because the members received services in return . 
IRS statistics show that the more persistent hiders of income among sole proprietors of businesses include used-car dealers , entertainment producers , masons , roofers , and taxi owners . 
Small businesses in general account for almost 40 % of unreported personal income , the IRS has said . 
Once such abuses become so pervasive , the IRS builds another factor into its secret computer formula for selecting returns for audit and does n't need special projects for them . 
San Franciscans have a much higher incidence of audits than average because more of them score high under that formula , not because IRS agents envy their life styles . 
Many openings for mass cheating , such as questionable tax shelters and home offices , have gaped so broadly that Congress has passed stringent laws to close them . 
Deductions of charitable gifts of highly valued art now must be accompanied by appraisals . 
And laws requiring the reporting of more varieties of transactions have enabled the IRS to rely on computers to ferret out discrepancies with returns and to generate form-letter inquiries to taxpayers . 
Unreported alimony income can be spotted by computer because a payer of alimony ( who gets a deduction ) must report the former spouse 's Social Security number . 
Passport applicants now must give Social Security numbers , enabling the IRS to see whether Americans living abroad are filing required U.S. returns . 
But while IRS computers focus routinely on target groups like these , the agency has assigned many agents to special projects that need more personal attention . 
In most cases , the IRS says , these projects are local or regional , rather than national , and arise because auditors in an area detect some pattern of abuse among , say , factory workers claiming that having a multitude of dependents frees them from tax withholding or yacht owners deducting losses from sideline charter businesses . 
The national office currently has 21 noncriminal audit projects , according to Marshall V. Washburn , deputy assistant commissioner for examination . 
Auditors involved in noncriminal projects ca n't send anyone to jail , but they can make life miserable in other ways -- for one , by imposing some of the 150 different civil penalties for negligence , failure to file a return , and the like . 
The targeted audit groups include direct sellers -- people who sell cosmetics , housewares and other items door to door or at home parties -- and employers who label workers as independent contractors instead of employees , to avoid the employer share of payroll taxes . 
Other projects look for offenders among waiters who get cash tips , people who engage in large cash transactions , and people whose returns show they sold a home for a profit without reinvesting the capital gain in another home by the end of the same year ; the gain must be rolled over within two years to defer tax . 
And now that returns must show dependents ' Social Security numbers , the IRS wants to see which dependents show up on more than one return -- and which dependents turn out to be deceased . 
Impetus for the direct-seller project came from a congressional hearing some years back . 
It prompted an IRS study that found many sellers were concealing income and treating large amounts of nondeductible travel and other personal expenses as business costs , Mr. Washburn says . 
The study provided criteria for singling out returns of `` potentially noncompliant '' taxpayers who report low income and large expenses from a part-time business . 
The Tax Court recently denied business deductions by Mr. and Mrs. Peter S. Rubin of Cherry Hill , N.J. , who both were part-time distributors of Amway products in addition to their regular jobs as sales people in other fields . 
For 1984 , they reported gross income of $ 1,647 from Amway sales , offset by expenses totaling $ 16,746 -- including car costs of $ 6,805 and travel and entertainment costs of $ 5,088 . 
The Tax Court did n't believe that the Rubins , who earned $ 65,619 in their regular jobs , treated the sideline as a real business and derived `` merely incidental elements of recreation and other personal pleasure and benefits '' from it . 
The Direct Selling Association , a trade group , points out that its members , which include Amway Corp. , cooperate with the IRS to distribute tax-compliance material to sales people and are helping to prepare a public-service television program on the subject . 
The independent-contractor project , which began in 1988 , involves about 350 IRS agents . 
In the fiscal nine months ended June 30 , reports Raymond P. Keenan , assistant commissioner for collection , they examined about 13,000 employers , assessed more than $ 67 million in delinquent employment taxes , and reclassified about 56,000 workers as employees instead of self-employed contractors . 
The number of misclassified workers may be in the millions , mostly paid by small firms . 
Many workers , especially professionals , want to remain independent to avoid tax withholding and to continue to deduct many expenses that employees ca n't . 
But many others , who want to qualify for employee benefits and unemployment compensation , become tipsters for the IRS , says Jerry Lackey , who manages the IRS project 's force of nine agents in north and central Florida from Orlando . 
Firms that are paying employment taxes also provide leads to competitors that are n't , he says . 
In his area , Mr. Lackey continues , the miscreant employers most commonly are in construction -- doing framing , drywall , masonry and similar work . 
But a medical clinic with about 20 employees wrongly listed all of them -- including physicians and receptionists -- as independent contractors . 
The IRS assessed the clinic $ 350,000 in back payroll taxes . 
It assessed nearly $ 500,000 against a cruise-ship company that carried about 100 deckhands , cooks , bartenders , entertainers and other employees as self-employed independents . 
Revenue-short states also are becoming more aggressive pursuers of tax delinquents , and perhaps none tracks them down with more relish than does New York since it acquired an $ 80 million computer system in 1985 . 
The state 's tax enforcers have amassed data bases from other New York agencies that license or register professionals and businesses ; from exchange agreements with the IRS , 24 other states , and two Canadian provinces , and even from phonebook Yellow Pages . 
Thus armed for massive matching of documents by computer , they single out high-income groups , looking primarily for people who have n't filed New York income-tax returns . 
The state has combed through records relating to architects , stockbrokers , lawyers in the New York City area , construction workers from out of the state , and homeowners who claim to be residents of other states -- especially Florida , which has no personal income tax . 
Soon to feel the glare of attention are lawyers elsewhere in the state , doctors , dentists , and accountants , says Frederick G. Hicks , director of the tax-department division that develops the computer-matching programs . 
The department has collected over $ 6.5 million from brokers so far and recommended more than 30 of them for criminal prosecution . 
In the early stage of checking people with incomes exceeding $ 500,000 who were filing nonresident returns , it squeezed $ 7.5 million out of a man who was posing as a Florida resident . 
`` We think we can reclaim hundreds of millions of dollars just through the nonresident project , '' Mr. Hicks declares . 
Mr. Schmedel is editor of The Wall Street Journal 's Tax Report column . 
In finding `` good news '' in Berkeley 's new freshman admissions plan ( `` The Privileged Class , '' editorial , Sept. 20 ) , you 're reading the headline but not the story . 
The plan indeed raises from 40 % to 50 % the number of freshmen applicants admitted strictly by academic criteria . 
But that does n't mean `` half of the students attending Berkeley '' will be admitted this way . 
The plan is talking about applicants admitted , not students who enroll . 
Since the `` yield '' from this top slice of applicants is relatively low , boosting admits from 40 % to 50 % will boost registrants from about 31 % to 38 % of the class . 
In addition , perhaps 5 % of registrants will come from a new category consisting of applicants whose academic credentials `` narrowly missed '' gaining them admission in the first category . 
But against that combined increase of 12 % in students chosen by academic criteria , the plan eliminates a large category in which admissions now are based on grades , test scores and `` supplemental points '' for factors such as high-school curriculum , English-language proficiency and an essay . 
This category now accounts for about 19 % of admits and 22 % of registrants . 
The plan thus will decrease by 22 % , for a net loss of 10 % , the number of students admitted primarily by academic criteria . 
Who will take over these places ? 
The plan creates a new category of students from `` socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds , '' a concept not yet defined , and gives them about 10 % of the class . 
One of the plan 's authors has defended the `` socioeconomic disadvantage '' category as perhaps making more sense than the current affirmative-action preferences based on race . 
Perhaps it does . 
But the new category does not replace or reduce Berkeley 's broad racial preferences . 
Nor will students from racial-minority groups who are admitted through the new category be counted against the affirmative-action `` target '' for their group . 
The plan thus places a large new affirmative-action program , based on `` socioeconomic disadvantage , '' on top of the existing program based on race . 
The role of academic criteria in choosing Berkeley 's freshmen can only decline as a result . 
Stephen R. Barnett Professor of Law University of California Berkeley , Calif . 
FOR THOSE WHO DELIGHT in the misfortune of others , read on . 
This is a story about suckers . 
Most of us know a sucker . 
Many of us are suckers . 
But what we may not know is just what makes somebody a sucker . 
What makes people blurt out their credit-card numbers to a caller they 've never heard of ? 
Do they really believe that the number is just for verification and is simply a formality on the road to being a grand-prize winner ? 
What makes a person buy an oil well from some stranger knocking on the screen door ? 
Or an interest in a retirement community in Nevada that will knock your socks off , once it is built ? 
Because in the end , these people always wind up asking themselves the same question : `` How could I be so stupid ? '' 
There are , unfortunately , plenty of answers to that question -- and scam artists know all of them . 
`` These people are very skilled at finding out what makes a person tick , '' says Kent Neal , chief of the economic-crime unit of the Broward County State Attorney 's Office in Fort Lauderdale , Fla. , a major haven for boiler rooms . 
`` Once they size them up , then they know what buttons to push . '' 
John Blodgett agrees -- and he ought to know . 
He used to be a boiler-room salesman , peddling investments in oil and gas wells and rare coins . 
`` There 's a definite psychology of the sale and different personalities you pitch different ways , '' he says . 
The most obvious pitch , of course , is the lure of big returns . 
`` We 're all a little greedy . 
Everyone is vulnerable , '' says Charles Harper , associate regional administrator for the Securities and Exchange Commission in Miami . 
`` These guys prey on human frailties . '' 
While the promises of big profits ought to set off warning bells , they often do n't , in part because get-rich-quick tales have become embedded in American folklore . 
`` The overnight success story is part of our culture , and our society puts an emphasis on it with lotteries and Ed McMahon making millionaires out of people , '' says Michael Cunningham , an associate professor of psychology at the University of Kentucky in Louisville . 
`` Other people are making it overnight , and the rest who toil daily do n't want to miss that opportunity when it seems to come along . '' 
Adds Spencer Barasch , branch chief for enforcement at the SEC in Fort Worth , Texas : `` Why do people play the lottery when the odds are great against them ? 
People are shooting for a dream . '' 
Clearly , though , scam artists have to be a bit more subtle than simply promising millions ; the psychology of suckers is n't simply the psychology of the greedy . 
There 's also , for instance , the need to be part of the in-crowd . 
So one popular ploy is to make a prospective investor feel like an insider , joining an exclusive group that is about to make a killing . 
Between 1978 and 1987 , for instance , SH Oil in Winter Haven , Fla. , sold interests in oil wells to a very select group of local residents , while turning away numerous other eager investors . 
The owner of the company , Stephen Smith , who has since pleaded guilty to state and federal fraud charges , confided to investors that he had a secret agreement with Amoco Oil Co. and said the location of his wells was confidential , according to a civil suit filed in a Florida state court by the Florida comptroller 's office . 
Neither the Amoco agreement nor the wells existed , the suit alleged . 
Such schemes , says Tony Adamski , chief of the financial-crimes unit of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Washington , D.C. , appeal to investors ' `` desire to believe this is really true and that they are part of a chosen group being given this opportunity . '' 
At times , salesmen may embellish the inside information with `` the notion that this is some slightly shady , slightly illegal investment the person is being included in , '' says Mr. Cunningham . 
In appealing to those with a bit of larceny in their hearts , the fraud artist can insist that a person keep an investment secret -- insulating himself from being discovered and keeping his victim from consulting with others . 
It also adds to the mystery of the venture . 
Mr. Blodgett , the boiler-room veteran , believes that for many investors , the get-rich-quick scams carry a longed-for element of excitement . 
`` Once people got into it , I was allowing them to live a dream , '' he says . 
He phoned them with updates on the investment , such as `` funny things that happened at the well that week , '' he says . 
`` You gave them some excitement that they did n't have in their lives . '' 
( Mr. Blodgett , who was convicted in Florida state court of selling unregistered securities and in California state court of unlawful use of the telephone to defraud and deceive , is now on probation . 
He says he has quit the business and is back in school , majoring in psychology with aspirations to go into industrial psychology . ) 
For some investors , it 's the appearances that leave them deceived . 
`` The trappings of success go a long way -- wearing the right clothes , doing the right things , '' says Paul Andreassen , an associate professor of psychology at Harvard . 
Conservative appearances make people think it 's a conservative investment . 
`` People honestly lose money on risky investments that they did n't realize were a crapshoot , '' he says . 
Paul Wenz , a Phoenix , Ariz. , attorney , says a promise of unrealistic returns would have made him leery . 
But Mr. Wenz , who says he lost $ 43,000 in one precious-metals deal and $ 39,000 in another , says a salesman `` used a business-venture approach '' with him , sending investment literature , a contract limiting the firm 's liability , and an insurance policy . 
When he visited the company 's office , he says , it had `` all the trappings of legitimacy . '' 
Still others are stung by a desire to do both well and good , says Douglas Watson , commanding officer of the Los Angeles Police Department 's bunko-forgery division . 
Born-again Christians are the most visible targets of unscrupulous do-gooder investment pitches . 
But hardly the only ones : The scams promise -- among other things -- to help save the environment , feed starving families and prevent the disappearance of children . 
Psychologists say isolated people who do n't discuss their investments with others are particularly at risk for fraud . 
Scam artists seek out such people -- or try to make sure that their victims isolate themselves . 
For instance , salesmen may counter a man 's objection that he wants to discuss an investment with his wife by asking , `` Who wears the pants in your family ? '' 
Or an investor who wants his accountant 's advice may be told , `` You seem like a guy who can make up his own mind . '' 
Often con artists will try to disarm their victims by emphasizing similarities between them . 
William Lynes , a retired engineer from Lockheed Corp. , says he and his wife , Lily , warmed to the investment pitches of a penny-stock peddler from Stuart-James Co. in Atlanta after the broker told them he , too , had once worked with Lockheed . 
The Lyneses , of Powder Springs , Ga. , have filed suit in Georgia state court against Stuart James , alleging fraud . 
They are awaiting an arbitration proceeding . 
They say the broker took them out for lunch frequently . 
He urged them to refer their friends , who also lost money . 
( Donald Trinen , an attorney for the penny-brokerage firm , denies the fraud allegations and says the Lyneses were fully apprised that they were pursuing a high-risk investment . ) 
`` It 's not uncommon for these guys to send pictures of themselves or their families to ingratiate themselves to their clients , '' says Terree Bowers , chief of the major-frauds section of the U.S. attorney 's office in Los Angeles . 
`` We 've seen cases where salesmen will affect the accent of the region of the country they are calling . 
Anything to make a sale . '' 
Experts say that whatever a person 's particular weak point , timing is crucial . 
People may be particularly vulnerable to flim-flam pitches when they are in the midst of a major upheaval in their lives . 
`` Sometimes when people are making big changes , retiring from their jobs , moving to a new area , they lose their bearings , '' says Maury Elvekrog , a licensed psychologist who is now an investment adviser and principal in Seger-Elvekrog Inc. , a Birmingham , Mich. , investment-counseling firm . 
`` They may be susceptible to some song and dance if it hits them at the right time . '' 
They are obviously also more susceptible when they need money - retirees , for instance , trying to bolster their fixed income or parents fretting over how to pay for a child 's college expenses . 
`` These people are n't necessarily stupid or naive . 
Almost all of us in comparable circumstances might be victimized in some way , '' says Jerald Jellison , a psychology professor at the University of Southern California in Los Angeles . 
Nick Cortese thinks that 's what happened to him . 
Mr. Cortese , a 33-year-old Delta Air Lines engineer , invested some $ 2,000 in penny stocks through a broker who promised quick returns . 
`` We were saving up to buy a house , and my wife was pregnant , '' says Mr. Cortese . 
`` It was just before the Christmas holidays , and I figured we could use some extra cash . '' 
The investment is worth about $ 130 today . 
`` Maybe it was just a vulnerable time , '' says Mr. Cortese . 
`` Maybe the next day or even an hour later , I would n't have done it . '' 
Ms. Brannigan is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal 's Atlanta bureau . 
Prices for seats on the New York Stock Exchange are recovering a bit after hitting a four-year low earlier this month . 
Two seats on the Big Board were sold yesterday for $ 455,000 , and then $ 500,000 . 
The previous sale was $ 436,000 on Oct. 17 ; the last time prices were that low was November 1985 , when a seat sold for $ 425,000 . 
Prices peaked at $ 1,150,000 in September 1987 . 
Seats are currently quoted at $ 430,000 bid and $ 525,000 asked . 
FOX HUNTING HAS been defined as the unspeakable in pursuit of the inedible , but at least it 's exercise . 
At least it has a little dash . 
Most of us have to spend our time on pursuits that afford neither , drab duties rather than pleasures . 
Like trying to buy life insurance , for instance , an endeavor notably lacking in dash . 
Call it the uninformed trudging after the incomprehensible . 
But sooner or later , most of us have to think about life insurance , just as we often have to think about having root-canal work . 
And my time has come . 
I 'm 33 , married , no children , and employed in writing stories like this one . 
In times past , life-insurance salesmen targeted heads of household , meaning men , but ours is a two-income family and accustomed to it . 
So if anything happened to me , I 'd want to leave behind enough so that my 33-year-old husband would be able to pay off the mortgage and some other debts ( though not , I admit , enough to put any potential second wife in the lap of luxury ) . 
Figuring that maybe $ 100,000 to $ 150,000 would do but having no idea of what kind of policy I wanted , I looked at the myriad products of a dozen companies -- and plunged into a jungle of gibberish . 
Over the past decade or two , while I was thinking about fox hunting , the insurance industry has spawned an incredible number of products , variations on products , and variations on the variations . 
Besides term life and whole life ( the old standbys ) , we now have universal life , universal variable life , flexible adjustable universal life , policies with persistency bonuses , policies festooned with exotic riders , living benefit policies , and on and on . 
What to do ? 
First , generalize . 
Shorn of all their riders , special provisions , and other bells and whistles , insurance policies can still be grouped under two broad categories : so-called pure insurance , which amasses no cash value in the policy and pays off only upon death , and permanent insurance , which provides not only a death benefit but also a cash value in the policy that can be used in various ways while the insured is still alive . 
If all you want is death-benefit coverage , pure insurance -- a term policy -- gives you maximum bang for your buck , within limits . 
It 's much cheaper than permanent insurance bought at the same age . 
But `` term '' means just that ; the policy is written for a specific time period only and must be renewed when it expires . 
It may also stipulate that the insured must pass another medical exam before renewal ; if you flunk -- which means you need insurance more than ever -- you may not be able to buy it . 
Even if you 're healthy and can renew , your premium will go up sharply because you 're that much older . 
So term insurance may not be as cheap as it looks . 
There are all sorts of variations on term insurance : policies structured to pay off your mortgage debt , term riders tacked on to permanent insurance , and many others . 
One variation that appealed to me at first was the `` Money Smart Term Life '' policy offered by Amex Life Insurance Co. , the American Express unit , to the parent company 's credit-card holders . 
Upon examination , however , I wondered whether the plan made a lot of sense . 
Amex said it would charge me $ 576 a year for $ 100,000 of coverage -- and would pay me back all the premiums I put in if I canceled the policy after 10 years . 
Sounds great -- or does it ? 
First , if I canceled , I 'd have no more insurance , a not insignificant consideration . 
Second , the $ 5,760 I 'd get back would be much diminished in purchasing power by 10 years of inflation ; Amex , not I , would get the benefit of the investment income on my money , income that would have exceeded the inflation rate and thus given the company a real profit . 
Third and most important , Amex would charge me a far higher premium than other reputable companies would on a straight term policy for the same amount ; I 'd be paying so heavily just to have the option of getting my premiums back that I 'd almost have to cancel to make the whole thing worthwhile . 
That would be all right with Amex , which could then lock in its investment profit , but it does n't add up to a `` smart money '' move for me . 
Which goes to show that the First Law applies in insurance as in anything else : There is no free lunch , there is only marketing . 
And the Second Law , unique to insurance ? 
If I die early , I win -- a hollow victory , since I ca n't enjoy it -- and if I live long , the insurer wins . 
Always . 
This is worth remembering when insurers and their salesmen try to sell you permanent insurance , the kind that amasses cash value . 
The word `` death '' can not be escaped entirely by the industry , but salesmen dodge it wherever possible or cloak it in euphemisms , preferring to talk about `` savings '' and `` investment '' instead . 
The implication is that your permanent-insurance policy is really some kind of CD or mutual-fund account with an added feature . 
That is gilding the lily . 
The fact is that as a savings or investment vehicle , insurance generally runs a poor second to any direct investment you might make in the same things the insurance company is putting your money into . 
That 's because you have to pay for the insurance portion of the policy and the effort required to sell and service the whole package . 
Again , no free lunch . 
This is reflected in a built-in mortality cost -- in effect , your share of the company 's estimated liability in paying off beneficiaries of people who had the effrontery to die while under its protection . 
And in most cases , a huge hunk of your premium in the initial year or two of the the policy is , in effect , paying the salesman 's commission as well ; investment returns on most policies are actually negative for several years , largely because of this . 
So view permanent insurance for what it is -- a compromise between pure insurance and direct investment . 
The simplest , most traditional form of permanent insurance is the straight whole life policy . 
You pay a set premium for a set amount of coverage , the company invests that premium in a portfolio of its choosing , and your cash value and dividends grow over the years . 
One newer wrinkle , so called single-premium life ( you pay for the whole policy at once ) , has been immensely popular in recent years for tax reasons ; the insured could extract cash value in the form of policy `` loans , '' and none of the proceeds were taxable even though they included gains on investment . 
Congress closed this loophole last year , or thought it did . 
However , Monarch Capital Corp. of Springfield , Mass. , has developed a `` combination plan '' of annuity and insurance coverage that it says does not violate the new regulations and that allows policy loans without tax consequences . 
But the percentage of your cash reserve that you can borrow tax-free is very small . 
I 'm not prepared in any case to put that much money into a policy immediately , so I look into the broad category called universal life . 
Hugely popular , it is far more flexible than straight whole life . 
I can adjust the amount of insurance I want against the amount going into investment ; I can pay more or less than the so-called target premium in a given year ; and I can even skip payments if my cash reserves are enough to cover the insurance portion of the policy . 
In looking at these and other policies , I learn to ask pointed questions about some of the assumptions built into `` policy illustrations '' -- the rows of numbers that show me the buildup of my cash values over the years . 
They commonly give two scenarios : One is based on interest rates that the company guarantees ( usually 4 % to 4.5 % ) and the other on the rate it is currently getting on investment , often 8.5 % or more . 
Projecting the latter over several decades , I find my cash buildup is impressive -- but can any high interest rate prevail for that long ? 
Not likely , I think . 
Also , some policy illustrations assume that mortality costs will decline or that I will get some sort of dividend bonus after the 10th year . 
These are not certain , either . 
Companies `` are n't comfortable playing these games , but they realize they 're under pressure to make their policies look good , '' says Timothy Pfiefer , an actuarial consultant at Tillinghast , a unit of Towers Perrin Co. , the big New York consulting firm . 
Another factor to consider : Some of the companies currently earning very high yields are doing so through substantial investment in junk bonds , and you know how nervous the market has been about those lately . 
There are seemingly endless twists to universal life , and it pays to ask questions about all of them . 
At a back-yard barbecue , for example , a friend boasts that she 'll only have to pay premiums on her John Hancock policy for seven years and that her death benefits will then be `` guaranteed . '' 
I call her agent , David Dominici . 
Yes , he says , premiums on such variable-rate coverage can be structured to `` vanish '' after a certain period -- but usually only if interest rates stay high enough to generate sufficient cash to cover the annual cost of insurance protection . 
If interest rates plunge , the insurer may be knocking on my door , asking for steeper premium payments to maintain the same amount of protection . 
I do n't like the sound of that . 
Some insurers have also started offering `` persistency bonuses , '' such as extra dividends or a marginally higher interest yield , if the policy is maintained for 10 years . 
But Glenn Daily , a New York-based financial consultant , warns that many of these bonuses are `` just fantasies , '' because most are n't guaranteed by the companies . 
And the feature is so new , he adds , that no insurer has yet established a track record for actually making such payments . 
So-called living-benefits provisions also merit a close inspection . 
Offered by insurers that include Security-Connecticut Life Insurance Co. , Jackson National Life Insurance Co. , and National Travelers Life Insurance Co. , these policy riders let me tap a portion of my death benefits while I 'm still alive . 
Some provisions would let me collect a percentage of the policy 's face value to pay for long-term care such as nursing-home stays ; others would allow payments for catastrophic illnesses and conditions such as cancer , heart attarcks , renal failure and kidney transplants . 
But the catastrophic events for which the policyholder can collect are narrowly defined , vary from policy to policy , and generally permit use of only a small fraction of the face amount of insurance . 
Also , financial planners advising on insurance say that to their knowledge there has not yet been a tax ruling exempting these advance payments from taxes . 
And considering the extra cost of such provisions , some figure that people interested in , say , paying for extended nursing-home care would be better off just buying a separate policy that provides it . 
I 'm more favorably impressed by `` no-load life , '' even though it turns out to be low-load life . 
Insureres selling these policies market them directly to the public or otherwise do n't use commissioned salesmen ; there is still a load -- annual administrative fees and initial `` setup '' charges -- but I figure that the lack of commission and of `` surrender fees '' for dropping the policy early still saves me a lot . 
I compared one universal policy for $ 130,000 face amount from such an insurer , American Life Insurance Corp. of Lincoln , Neb. , with a similar offering from Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S. , which operates through 11,000 commissioned salesmen . 
After one year I could walk away from the Ameritas policy with $ 792 , but Id get only $ 14 from the Equitable . 
The difference is magnified by time , too . 
At age 65 , when I 'd stop paying premiums , the Ameritas offering would have a projected cash value $ 14,000 higher than the other , even though the Equitable 's policy illustration assumed a fractionally higher interest rate . 
Did I buy it ? 
Well , not yet . 
I 'm thinking about using the $ 871 annual premium to finance a trip to Paris first . 
A person can do some heavy thinking about insurance there -- and shop for something more exciting while she 's doing it . 
Rorer Group Inc. will report that third-quarter profit rose more than 15 % from a year earlier , though the gain is wholly due to asset sales , Robert Cawthorn , chairman , president and chief executive officer , said . 
His projection indicates profit in the latest quarter of more than $ 17.4 million , or 55 cents a share , compared with $ 15.2 million , or 48 cents a share , a year ago . 
Mr. Cawthorn said in an interview that sales will show an increase from a year ago of `` somewhat less than 10 % . '' 
Through the first six months of 1989 , sales had grown about 12 % from the year-earlier period . 
Growth of 10 % would make sales for the latest quarter $ 269 million , compared with $ 244.6 million a year ago . 
Mr. Cawthorn said the profit growth in the latest quarter was due to the sale of two Rorer drugs . 
Asilone , an antacid , was sold to Boots PLC , London . 
Thrombinar , a drug used to stanch bleeding , was sold to Jones Medical Industries Inc. , St. Louis . 
He said Rorer sold the drugs for `` nice prices '' and will record a combined , pretax gain on the sales of $ 20 million . 
As the gain from the sales indicates , operating profit was `` significantly '' below the year-earlier level , Mr. Cawthorn said . 
Rorer in July had projected lower third-quarter operating profit but higher profit for all of 1989 . 
He said the company is still looking for `` a strong fourth quarter in all areas -- sales , operating income and net income . '' 
Mr. Cawthorn attributed the decline in third-quarter operating profit to the stronger dollar , which reduces the value of overseas profit when it is translated into dollars ; to accelerated buying of Rorer products in the second quarter because of a then-pending July 1 price increase , and to higher marketing expenses for Rorer 's Maalox antacid , whose sales and market share in the U.S. had slipped in the first half of 1989 . 
He said Rorer opted to sell Asilone and Thrombinar to raise revenue that would `` kick start '' its increased marketing efforts behind Maalox , still its top-selling product with about $ 215 million in world-wide sales in 1988 . 
`` We had underfunded Maalox for a year , '' he said , because the company was concentrating on research and development and promoting other drugs . 
He said Rorer will spend $ 15 million to $ 20 million more on Maalox advertising and promotion in the second half of 1989 than in the year-earlier period . 
A `` big chunk '' of that additional spending came in the third quarter , he said . 
Hoechst AG said it will stop producing fertilizer in 1990 because of continued losses and a bleak outlook . 
The West German chemical concern said it will close the last remaining fertilizer plant in Oberhausen in the fall of next year . 
Hoechst said the fertilizer market faces overcapacity in Western Europe , rising imports from East bloc countries and overseas , and declining demand . 
HomeFed Corp. said its main subsidiary , Home Federal Savings & Loan , converted from a federal savings and loan to a federal savings bank and changed its name to HomeFed Bank . 
The federal Office of Thrift Supervision approved the conversion last Friday , HomeFed said . 
The change in charter does n't alter the federal insurance of deposits , federal regulatory powers or company operations , a spokesman said . 
It was the second anniversary of the 1987 crash , but this time it was different . 
Stocks rallied on good earnings reports and on data that showed less inflation than expected . 
Blue chips led the march up in heavy trading . 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 39.55 points to 2683.20 . 
The 30 industrials led the market higher from the opening bell as foreign buyers stepped in . 
By afternoon , the broader market joined the advance in full strength . 
Standard & Poor 's 500-stock Index rose 5.37 to 347.13 and the Nasdaq composite index jumped 7.52 to 470.80 . 
New York Stock Exchange volume swelled to 198,120,000 shares . 
The industrials were up about 60 points in the afternoon , but cautious investors took profits before the close . 
Traders said a variety of factors triggered the rally . 
The consumer price index rose 0.2 % in September , while many economists were looking for a 0.4 % increase . 
Stock-index arbitrage buy programs -- in which traders buy stock against offsetting positions in futures to lock in price differences -- helped the rally 's momentum . 
The euphoria was such that investors responded to good earnings reports of companies such as American Express , while ignoring the disappointing profits of companies such as Caterpillar , analysts said . 
Stock-index arbitrage trading was a minor influence in yesterday 's rally , traders said . 
Institutional buyers were the main force pushing blue chips higher . 
To the amazement of some traders , takeover stocks were climbing again . 
Hilton rose 2 7\/8 to 100 , for example . 
Last Friday , takeover traders spilled out of Hilton , knocking the stock down 21 1\/2 to 85 . 
Among other stocks involved in restructurings or rumored to be so : Holiday Corp. gained 1 7\/8 to 73 and Honeywell rose 2 7\/8 to 81 1\/2 . 
One floor trader noted in astonishment that nobody seemed to mind the news that British Airways is n't making a special effort to revive the UAL buy-out . 
The announcement of the buy-out 's troubles triggered the market 's nose dive a week ago . 
Takeover enthusiasm may have been renewed when an investor group disclosed yesterday that it had obtained all the financing required to complete its $ 1.6 billion leveraged buy-out of American Medical International . 
`` That 's put some oomph back into this market , '' said Peter VandenBerg , a vice president of equity trading at Shearson Lehman Hutton . 
But some traders thought there was less to the rally than met the eye . 
`` There is no strength behind this rally , '' asserted Chung Lew , head trader at Kleinwort Benson North America . 
`` It 's traders squaring positions . 
It 's not good ; the market is setting up for another fall . '' 
Indeed , many traders said that uncertainty about today 's monthly expiration of stocks-index futures and options , and options on individual stocks , prompted a lot of buying by speculative traders who were unwinding positions that were bets on declining stock prices . 
The number of outstanding contracts in the October Major Market Index jumped from 5,273 on Friday to 9,023 on Monday . 
The MMI is a 20-stock index that mimics the Dow Jones Industrial Average . 
Outstanding contracts are those that remain to be liquidated . 
By Wednesday , the outstanding October contracts amounted to 8,524 , representing about $ 1.13 billion in stock , noted Donald Selkin , head of stock-index futures research at Prudential-Bache Securities , who expects a volatile expiration today . 
`` There has been a tremendous increase '' in MMI positions , Mr. Selkin said . 
Consumer stocks once again set the pace for blue-chip issues . 
Philip Morris added 1 1\/8 to 44 1\/2 in Big Board composite trading of 3.7 million shares , Coca-Cola Co. gained 2 3\/8 to 70 3\/8 , Merck gained 1 3\/8 to 77 3\/8 and American Telephone & Telegraph advanced 7\/8 to 43 3\/8 on 2.5 million shares . 
American Medical jumped 1 7\/8 to 23 5\/8 . 
IMA Acquisition , an investor group that includes First Boston and the Pritzker family of Chicago , said Chemical Bank had made arrangements for 23 other banks to provide $ 509 million in bank financing for the buy-out offer . 
Chemical and six other banks , along with First Boston , are providing the rest of the $ 1.6 billion . 
Elsewhere on the takeover front , Time Warner advanced 2 5\/8 to 136 5\/8 and Warner Communications tacked on 7\/8 to 63 7\/8 . 
The Delaware Supreme Court affirmed a ruling that barred Chris-Craft Industries from voting its Warner preferred stock as a separate class in deciding on the companies ' proposed merger . 
Paramount Communications climbed 1 1\/4 to 58 1\/2 and MCA rose 1 1\/2 to 64 ; both media companies have long been mentioned as potential acquisition candidates . 
Among other actual and rumored targets , Woolworth rose 1 1\/4 to 60 1\/2 , Upjohn went up 1 1\/8 to 39 3\/4 , Armstrong World Industries gained 1 to 40 1\/8 and Kollmorgen rose 3\/4 to 13 7\/8 . 
In addition : -- Soo Line jumped 2 3\/4 to 20 1\/4 , above the $ 19.50 a share that Canadian Pacific offered for the company in a takeover proposal . 
-- Xtra gained 1 1\/8 to 27 1\/8 . 
Investor Robert M. Gintel , who owns a 4.7 % stake in the company , said he plans a proxy fight for control of its board . 
-- Golden Nugget rose 2 to 28 1\/4 . 
Its board approved the repurchase of as many as three million common shares , or about 17 % of its shares outstanding . 
Buying interest also resurfaced in the technology sector , including International Business Machines , whose board approved a $ 1 billion increase in its stock buy-back program . 
IBM rose 2 3\/8 to 104 1\/8 as 2.2 million shares changed hands . 
Compaq Computer soared 4 5\/8 to 111 1\/8 on 1.8 million shares in response to the company 's announcement of plans to introduce several products next month . 
Digital Equipment gained 1 3\/8 to 89 3\/4 despite reporting earnings for the September quarter that were on the low end of expectations . 
Among other technology issues , Cray Research rose 1 5\/8 to 37 , Hewlett-Packard added 1 1\/4 to 50 1\/4 , Tandem Computers rallied 1 1\/8 to 25 3\/4 , Data General rose 3\/4 to 14 1\/2 and Motorola gained 2 3\/8 to 59 1\/4 . 
On the other hand , Symbol Technologies dropped 1 1\/4 to 18 1\/2 after Shearson Lehman Hutton lowered its short-term investment rating on the stock and its 1989 earnings estimate , and Commodore International fell 7\/8 to 8 after the company said it expects to post a loss for the September quarter . 
Insurance stocks continued to climb on expectations that premium rates will rise in the aftermath of the earthquake in the San Francisco area . 
American International Group climbed 4 to 106 5\/8 , General Re rose 3 1\/8 to 89 5\/8 , Kemper added 2 1\/2 to 48 , AON went up 1 3\/8 to 36 and Chubb rose 1 1\/4 to 82 1\/4 . 
Stocks of major toy makers rallied in the wake of strong third-quarter earnings reports . 
Mattel added 1 1\/4 to 19 5\/8 , Tonka firmed 1 to 18 1\/2 and Lewis Galoob Toys rose 7\/8 to 13 5\/8 on the Big Board , while Hasbro gained 1 to 21 7\/8 on the American Stock Exchange . 
Capital Cities-ABC surged 42 5\/8 to 560 . 
Kidder Peabody raised its investment rating on the stock and its earnings estimates for 1989 and 1990 , based on optimism that the company 's ABC television network will continue to fare well in the ratings . 
Dun & Bradstreet lost 1 7\/8 to 51 7\/8 on 1.8 million shares . 
Merrill Lynch lowered its short-term rating on the stock and its estimate of 1990 earnings , citing a sales slowdown in the company 's credit-rating business . 
Pinnacle West Capital , which suspended its common-stock dividend indefinitely and reported a 91 % decline in third-quarter earnings , fell 5\/8 to 11 3\/8 . 
The Amex Market Value Index recorded its sharpest gain of the year by climbing 4.74 to 382.81 . 
Volume totaled 14,580,000 shares . 
B.A.T Industries , the most active Amex issue , rose 3\/8 to 12 3\/8 . 
The company received shareholder approval for its restructuring plan , designed to fend off a hostile takeover bid from a group headed by financier Sir James Goldsmith . 
Chambers Development Class A jumped 3 1\/8 to 37 1\/8 and Class B rose 2 5\/8 to 37 1\/4 . 
The company said six officers are buying a total of $ 1.5 million of its stock . 
TRC Cos. , the target of an investigation by the U.S. inspector general , dropped 2 to 10 3\/4 . 
The probe involves testing procedures used on certain government contracts by the company 's Metatrace unit . 
Avondale Industries Inc. , New Orleans , received a $ 23 million contract from the Navy to enlarge by 50 % the capacity of an auxiliary oiler . 
The award results from the Navy 's exercising of an option in an earlier contract it awarded Avondale . 
Richard J. Pinola was elected to the board of this personnel consulting concern , increasing its size to nine members . 
Mr. Pinola is president and chief operating officer of Penn Mutual Life Insurance Co . 
The Senate rejected a constitutional amendment that President Bush sought to protect the U.S. flag from desecration . 
The 51-48 roll call fell well short of the two-thirds majority needed to approve changes to the Constitution . 
The vote , in which 11 GOP lawmakers voted against Mr. Bush 's position , was a victory for Democratic leaders , who opposed the amendment as an intrusion on the Bill of Rights . 
`` We can support the American flag without changing the American Constitution , '' said Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell of Maine . 
In order to defuse pressure for an amendment , Mr. Mitchell and House Speaker Thomas Foley ( D. , Wash . ) had arranged for lawmakers to pass a statute barring flag desecration before voting on the constitutional change . 
Mr. Bush said he would allow the bill to become law without his signature , because he said only a constitutional amendment can protect the flag adequately . 
In June , the Supreme Court threw out the conviction of a Texas man who set a flag afire during a 1984 demonstration , saying he was `` engaging in political expression '' that is protected by the First Amendment . 
If you think you have stress-related problems on the job , there 's good news and bad news . 
You 're probably right , and you are n't alone . 
A new Gallup Poll study commissioned by the New York Business Group on Health , found that a full 25 % of the work force at companies may suffer from anxiety disorders or a stress-related illness , with about 13 % suffering from depression . 
The study surveyed a national group of medical directors , personnel managers and employee assistance program directors about their perceptions of these problems in their companies . 
It is one of a series of studies on health commissioned by the New York Business Group , a non-profit organization with about 300 members . 
The stress study was undertaken because problems related to stress `` are much more prevalent than they seem , '' said Leon J. Warshaw , executive director of the business group . 
In presenting the study late last week , Dr. Warshaw estimated the cost of these types of disorders to business is substantial . 
Occupational disability related to anxiety , depression and stress costs about $ 8,000 a case in terms of worker 's compensation . 
In terms of days lost on the job , the study estimated that each affected employee loses about 16 work days a year because of stress , anxiety or depression . 
He added that the cost for stress-related compensation claims is about twice the average for all injury claims . 
`` We hope to sensitize employers '' to recognize the problems so they can do something about them , Dr. Warshaw said . 
Early intervention into these types of problems can apparently save businesses long-term expense associated with hospitalization , which sometimes results when these problems go untreated for too long . 
Even the courts are beginning to recognize the link between jobs and stress-related disorders in compensation cases , according to a survey by the National Council on Compensation Insurance . 
But although 56 % of the respondents in the study indicated that mental-health problems were fairly pervasive in the workplace , there is still a social stigma associated with people seeking help . 
The disorders , which 20 years ago struck middle-age and older people , `` now strike people at the height of productivity , '' says Robert M.A. Hirschfeld , of the National Institute of Mental Health , who spoke at the presentation of the study 's findings . 
The poll showed that company size had a bearing on a manager 's view of the problem , with 65 % of those in companies of more than 15,000 employees saying stress-related problems were `` fairly pervasive '' and 55 % of those in companies with fewer than 4,000 employees agreeing . 
The poll also noted fear of a takeover as a stress-producing event in larger companies . 
More than eight in 10 respondents reported such a stress-provoking situation in their company . 
Mid-sized companies were most affected by talk of layoffs or plant closings . 
The study , which received funding from Upjohn Co. , which makes several drugs to treat stress-related illnesses , also found 47 % of the managers said stress , anxiety and depression contribute to decreased production . 
Alcohol and substance abuse as a result of stress-related problems was cited by 30 % of those polled . 
Although Dr. Warshaw points out that stress and anxiety have their positive uses , `` stress perceived to be threatening implies a component of fear and anxiety that may contribute to burnout . '' 
He also noted that various work environments , such as night work , have their own `` stressors . '' 
`` We all like stress , but there 's a limit , '' says Paul D'Arcy , of Rohrer , Hibler & Replogle , a corporate psychology and management consulting firm . 
The problem , says Mr. D'Arcy , a psychologist , is that `` it 's very hard to get any hard measures on how stress affects job performance . 
For Cheap Air Fares , Spend Christmas Aloft 
IT IS N'T TRUE that a 90-year old clergyman on a mission of mercy to a disaster area on Christmas Day can fly free . 
But his circumstances are among the few that can qualify for the handful of really cheap airline tickets remaining in America . 
In recent years , carriers have become much more picky about who can fly on the cheap . 
But there still are a few ways today 's traveler can qualify under the airline 's many restrictions . 
One of the best deals , though , may mean skipping Christmas dinner with the relatives . 
This week , many carriers are announcing cut-rate fares designed to get people to fly on some of the most hallowed -- and slowest -- days of the year , including Christmas . 
In recent years , the airlines had waited until the last moment to court Christmas season vacationers with bargain fares . 
That approach flopped : Last Christmas Day , a USAir Group Inc. DC-9 jetliner flew about seven passengers from Chicago to Pittsburgh . 
So this year , the airlines are getting a jump on holiday discounts . 
They are cutting ticket prices by as much as 70 % from normal levels for travel to most U.S. locations on Dec. 24 , 25 , 29 , 30 and 31 , and Jan. 4 , 5 and 6 . 
The promotions -- dubbed everything from 'T- is the Season to be Jolly to Kringle fares -- put round-trip fares at $ 98 , $ 148 and $ 198 . 
`` They 're trying to keep planes flying on days they 'd normally park them , '' says Roger Bard , president of Mr. Mitchell Travel Service in Burnsville , N.C . 
Expect , of course , sky-high prices on other dates near the holidays when the airlines know vacationers are eager to travel . 
Consider Adopting Your Spouse 's Name 
IF CONTINENTAL Airlines has its way , couples like Marlo Thomas and Phil Donahue may find it a hassle to qualify for some new discounts . 
Continental , a Texas Air Corp. unit , recently unveiled a marketing program offering free companion tickets to business-class and first-class passengers on international flights . 
The Continental catch : Only immediate family members are allowed , and they must have the same last name as the buyer of the ticket or legal proof they 're related . 
That irritates many women who have n't taken their husbands ' last name . 
`` What a bunch of nonsense , '' says Jessica Crosby , president of the New York chapter of the National Association of Women Business Owners . 
`` This sets things way back . '' 
Continental 's logic : It does n't want business companions abusing the promotion by falsely claiming to be related . 
`` We accommodate their choice of names by allowing them to demonstrate '' family affiliation with legal documents , says Jim O'Donnell , a senior vice president . 
But gay rights advocates are angry , too . 
The Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund of New York City has received complaints from homosexual couples whom the airline does n't recognize as family . 
`` It 's certainly discrimination , '' says attorney Evan Wolfson , whose group forced Trans World Airlines this year to change a rule that allowed travelers to transfer frequent flier awards only to family members . 
Take Your Vacation In a Hurricane Area 
WHEN HURRICANE Hugo careened through the Caribbean and the Atlantic coast states , it downed electric and telephone lines , shot coconuts through cottage rooftops , shattered windows and uprooted thousands of lives . 
It also lowered some air fares . 
Since the hurricane , Midway Airlines Inc. and American Airlines , a unit of AMR Corp. , trimmed their one-way fares to the Virgin Islands to $ 109 from prices that were at times double that before the storm . 
The fares are code-named Hugo , Compassion and Virgin Islands Aid . 
( Airlines are n't lowering fares to Northern California following this week 's earthquake , but reservation agents can waive advance-purchase restrictions on discount fares for emergency trips . ) 
Some hotels in the hurricane-stricken Caribbean promise money-back guarantees . 
In Myrtle Beach , S.C. , the damaged Yachtsman Resort offers daily rates as low as $ 35 , or as much as 22 % below regular prices . 
Says Michele Hoffman , a clerk in the resort 's front office : `` We do n't have the outdoor pool , the pool table , ping pong table , snack bar or VCR , but we still have the indoor pool and Jacuzzi . '' 
Just Wait Until You 're a Bit Older 
SENIOR CITIZENS have long received cheap air fares . 
This year , the older someone is the bigger the discount . 
A senior citizen between 62 and 70 saves 70 % off regular coach fare . 
Travelers up to age 99 get a percentage discount matching their age . 
And centenarians fly free in first class . 
Next month , Northwest Airlines says , a 108-year-old Lansing , Mich. , woman is taking it up on the offer to fly with her 72-year-old son to Tampa , Fla . 
Last year when Northwest first offered the promotion , only six centenarians flew free . 
If All Else Fails ... . 
THE NATION'S carriers also provide discounts to Red Cross workers , retired military personnel and medical students . 
There 's even a special fare for clergy that does n't require the usual stay over Saturday night . 
That way , they can be home in time for work Sunday . 
The British Petroleum Co. PLC said its BP Exploration unit has produced the first oil from its Don oilfield in the North Sea . 
In an official release , BP said initial production from the field was 11,000 barrels a day , and that it expects peak output from the field of 15,000 barrels a day to be reached in 1990 . 
As the sponsor of the `` Older Americans Freedom to Work Act , '' which would repeal the Social Security earnings limit for people aged 65 and older , I applaud your strong endorsement to repeal this Depression-era fossil . 
For every dollar earned over $ 8,880 , Social Security recipients lose 50 cents of their Social Security benefits ; it 's like a 50 % marginal tax . 
But the compounded effects of `` seniors only '' taxes result in truly catastrophic marginal tax rates . 
Imagine a widow who wants to maintain her standard of living at the same level she had before she had to pay the catastrophic surtax . 
Although this widow earns only twice the minimum wage , largely due to the earnings limit , she would have to earn an additional $ 4,930 to offset her catastrophic surtax of $ 496 . 
Eliminating the earnings limit would greatly help seniors and reduce the deficit . 
Repeal would generate more in new taxes than the government would lose in increased Social Security benefit payments . 
We now need support from the Democrats on the Rules Committee in order to include earnings-limit reform in the Reconciliation Bill . 
Since all four Republicans on the committee are co-sponsors of my bill , it is the Democrats who will be held fully accountable if an earnings test amendment is not allowed from the floor . 
The time is now to lift the burdensome Social Security earnings limit from the backs of our nation 's seniors . 
Rep. J. Dennis Hastert ( R. , Ill . ) 
When his Seventh Avenue fur business here was flying high 20 years ago , Jack Purnick had 25 workers and a large factory . 
Now his half-dozen employees work in an eighth-floor shop that he says is smaller than his old storage room . 
He also says he is losing money now . 
He blames imports . 
But just down Seventh Avenue , where about 75 % of U.S. fur garments are made , Larry Rosen has acquired two retail outlets , broadened his fur-making line and expanded into leather . 
He credits imports . 
The difference lies in how the two entrepreneurial furriers reacted to the foreign competition and transformation of their industry over the past 10 years . 
One stuck to old-line business traditions , while the other embraced the change . 
`` The small , good fur salon is not what it used to be , '' says Mr. Purnick , 75 years old . 
`` We make the finest product in the world , and the Americans are being kicked around . '' 
Mr. Rosen , though , believes imports have reinvigorated the industry in which he has worked for most of his 57 years . 
`` You 've got some minds here that wo n't think progressively , '' he says . 
Import competition for U.S. furs has risen sharply since furriers started aggressively marketing `` working-girl mink '' and similar lower-priced imported furs in recent years . 
Merchants discovered a consumer largely ignored by higher-priced furriers : the younger woman -- even in her late 20s -- who never thought she could buy a mink . 
The new market helped boost U.S. fur sales to about $ 1.8 billion a year now , triple the level in the late 1970s . 
It also opened the door to furs made in South Korea , China , Hong Kong and other countries . 
Jindo Furs , a large South Korean maker , says it operates 35 retail outlets in the U.S. and plans to open 15 more by the end of next year . 
Mr. Purnick and other old-line furriers call many of the the imports unstylish and poorly made . 
High-end U.S. furriers say these imports have n't squeezed them . 
But low-priced and middle-priced furriers like Mr. Purnick , who once saturated the five-block Seventh Avenue fur district , say imports have cut their sales . 
A woman who once would have saved for two or three seasons to buy a U.S.-made mink can now get an imported mink right away for less than $ 2,000 . 
Yet Mr. Rosen has turned the import phenomenon to his advantage . 
Early in the decade he saw that fur workers in many foreign countries were willing to work longer hours at lower wages than their American counterparts and were more open to innovation . 
In 1982 , he started a factory in Greece . 
Two years later , he opened one in West Germany . 
He also noticed that foreign makers were introducing many variations on the traditional fur , and he decided to follow suit . 
By combining his strengths in innovation and quality control with the lower costs of production abroad , he says he has been able to produce high-quality goods at low cost . 
To maintain control over production and avoid overdependence on foreign sources , he says he still makes most of his furs in the U.S. . 
But six years ago he also began importing from the Far East . 
Inspired by imports , Mr. Rosen now makes fur muffs , hats and flings . 
This year he produced a men 's line and offers dyed furs in red , cherry red , violet , royal blue and forest green . 
He has leather jackets from Turkey that are lined with eel skin and topped off with raccoon-skin collars . 
From Asia , he has mink jackets with floral patterns made by using different colored furs . 
Next he will be testing pictured embroidery ( called kalega ) made in the Far East . 
He plans to attach the embroidery to the backs of mink coats and jackets . 
Besides adding to sales , leathers also attract retailers who may buy furs later , he adds . 
Other furriers have also benefited from leathers . 
Seymour Schreibman , the 65-year-old owner of Schreibman Raphael Furs Inc. , treats the reverse side of a Persian lambskin to produce a reversible fur-and-leather garment . 
He says it accounts for 25 % of total sales . 
Mr. Rosen is also pushing retail sales . 
This year he bought two stores , one in Brooklyn and one in Queens . 
Other furriers have also placed more weight on retailing . 
Golden Feldman Furs Inc. began retailing aggressively eight years ago , and now retail sales account for about 20 % of gross income . 
In other moves , Mr. Rosen says he bought a truck three years ago to reach more retailers . 
Since then he has expanded his fleet and can now bring his furs to the front door of retailers as far away as the Midwest . 
Small retailers who ca n't afford to travel to his New York showroom have become fair game . 
Such moves have helped Mr. Rosen weather the industry slump of recent years . 
The industry enjoyed six prosperous years beginning in 1980 , but since 1986 sales have languished at their $ 1.8 billion peak . 
Large furriers such as Antonovich Inc. , Fur Vault Inc. and Evans Inc. all reported losses in their latest fiscal years . 
Aftereffects of the 1987 stock market crash head the list of reasons . 
In addition , competition has glutted the market with both skins and coats , driving prices down . 
The animal-rights movement has n't helped sales . 
Warm winters over the past two years have trimmed demand , too , furriers complain . 
And those who did n't move some production overseas suffer labor shortages . 
`` The intensive labor needed to manufacture furs { in the U.S. . } is not as available as it was , '' says Mr. Schreibman , who is starting overseas production . 
But even those who have found a way to cope with the imports and the slump , fear that furs are losing part of their allure . 
`` People are promoting furs in various ways and taking the glamour out of the fur business , '' says Stephen Sanders , divisional merchandise manager for Marshall Field 's department store in Chicago . 
`` You ca n't make a commodity out of a luxury , '' insists Mr. Purnick , the New York furrier . 
He contends that chasing consumers with low-priced imports will harm the industry in the long run by reducing the prestige of furs . 
But Mr. Rosen responds : `` Whatever people want to buy , I 'll sell . 
The name of the game is to move goods . 
Four workers at GTE Corp. 's headquarters have been diagnosed as having hepatitis , and city health officials are investigating whether a cafeteria worker may have exposed hundreds of other GTE employees to the viral infection , company and city officials said . 
The four cases were all reported to GTE 's medical director and state and local health authorities . 
GTE shut down its cafeteria Tuesday afternoon after testing determined that at least one cafeteria worker employed by GTE 's private food vending contractor , ARA Services Inc. , was suffering from a strain of the virus , officials said . 
More than 700 people work in the GTE building . 
The cafeteria remains closed . 
Dr. Andrew McBride , city health director , said his staff suspects the hepatitis , which can be highly contagious , was spread by the cafeteria worker with the virus . 
The exact strain of hepatitis that the cafeteria worker contracted has n't been determined but should be known by the end of the week , Dr. McBride said . 
Hepatitis A , considered the least dangerous strain of the virus , has been confirmed in at least one GTE employee , company and city officials said . 
`` From a public health point of view we 're relieved because hepatitis A is rarely life-threatening , '' said Dr. Frank Provato , GTE 's medical director . 
`` It 's a double-edged sword though , because it is also the most contagious kind of hepatitis . '' 
GTE officials began posting warning notices about the potential threat to exposure Wednesday morning at various places at the company , said GTE spokesman Thomas Mattausch . 
The company has begun offering shots of gamma globulin , which will diminish the flu-like symptoms of hepatitis A , in anyone who has contracted the disease , Mr. Mattausch said . 
`` We 're strongly recommending that anyone who has eaten in the cafeteria this month have the shot , '' Mr. Mattausch added , `` and that means virtually everyone who works here . 
I was appalled to read the misstatements of facts in your Oct. 13 editorial `` Colombia 's Brave Publisher . '' 
It is the right-wing guerrillas who are aligned with the drug traffickers , not the left wing . 
This information was gleaned from your own news stories on the region . 
Past Colombian government tolerance of the `` narcotraficantes '' was due to the drug lords ' history of wiping out leftists in the hinterlands . 
Mary Poulin Palo Alto , Calif. 
I suggest that The Wall Street Journal ( as well as other U.S. news publications of like mind ) should put its money where its mouth is : Lend computer equipment to replace that damaged at El Espectador , buy ad space , publish stories under the bylines of El Espectador journalists . 
Perhaps an arrangement could be worked out to `` sponsor '' El Espectador journalists and staff by paying for added security in exchange for exclusive stories . 
Reward El Espectador 's courage with real support . 
Douglas B. Evans 
COCA-COLA Co . ( Atlanta ) -- 
Anton Amon and George Gourlay were elected vice presidents of this soft-drink company . 
Mr. Amon , 46 years old , is the company 's director of quality assurance ; most recently , he served as vice president , operations , for Coca-Cola Enterprises . 
Mr. Gourlay , 48 , is manager for corporate manufacturing operations ; he was assistant vice president at the company . 
In the wake of a slide in sterling , a tailspin in the stock market , and a string of problematic economic indicators , British Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson promised gradual improvement in the U.K. economy . 
In a speech prepared for delivery to London 's financial community , Mr. Lawson summed up current economic policy as a battle to wring inflation out of the British economy , using high interest rates as `` the essential instrument '' to carry out the campaign . 
Two weeks after boosting base rates to 15 % , he pledged that `` rates will have to remain high for some time to come . '' 
Mr. Lawson also made it clear that he would be watching exchange rates carefully . 
A sinking pound makes imports more expensive and increases businesses ' expectations of future inflation , he argued . 
In an apparent warning to currency traders who have lately been selling the British currency , he stated that the exchange rates will have a `` major role in the assessment of monetary conditions . '' 
In reaffirming the current monetary policy of using high interest rates to fight inflation and shore up the pound , Mr. Lawson dismissed other approaches to managing the economy . 
He said he monitors the money-supply figures , but does n't give them paramount importance , as some private and government economists have suggested . 
Mr. Lawson also dismissed the possibility of imposing direct credit controls on Britain 's financial system . 
Mr. Lawson 's speech , delivered at the Lord Mayor of London 's annual dinner at Mansion House , came on the heels of a grueling period for the U.K. economy . 
Two weeks ago , in a campaign to blunt inflation at home and arrest a world-wide plunge in the pound , he raised base rates a full percentage point to 15 % . 
Despite the increase , the British currency slid below a perceived threshold of three marks early last week . 
It was quoted at 2.9428 marks in late New York trading Wednesday . 
Leading up to the speech was a drumroll of economic statistics suggesting that the British war on inflation will be more bruising than previously assumed . 
Unemployment in September dropped to 1,695,000 , the lowest level since 1980 . 
While lower joblessness is generally good news , the hefty drop last month indicates that the economy is n't slowing down as much as hoped -- despite a doubling of interest rates over the last 16 months . 
Meanwhile , average earnings in Britain were up 8.75 % in August over the previous year . 
Another inflationary sign came in a surge in building-society lending to a record # 10.2 billion ( $ 16.22 billion ) last month , a much higher level than economists had predicted . 
In a separate speech prepared for delivery at the dinner , Robin Leigh-Pemberton , Bank of England governor , conceded that `` demand pressures were even more buoyant than had been appreciated '' when the British economy was heating up last year . 
He added that `` there 's no quick-fix solution '' to the economic woes , and said `` tight monetary policy is the right approach . '' 
Discussing the recent slide in stock prices , the central bank governor stated that `` the markets now appear to have steadied '' after the `` nasty jolt '' of the 190.58-point plunge in the Dow Jones Industrial Average a week ago . 
Although the New York market plunge prompted a 70.5-point drop in the London Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100 Share Index , Mr. Leigh-Pemberton declared `` that the experience owed nothing to the particular problems of the British economy . '' 
Specifically , he pointed out that compared with the U.S. market , the U.K. has far fewer highly leveraged junk-bond financings . 
Discussing future monetary arrangements , Mr. Lawson repeated the Thatcher government 's commitment to join the exchange rate mechanism of the European Monetary System , but he did n't indicate when . 
Ing . 
C. Olivetti & Co. , claiming it has won the race in Europe to introduce computers based on a powerful new microprocessor chip , unveiled its CP486 computer yesterday . 
The product is the first from a European company based on Intel Corp. 's new 32-bit 486tm microprocessor , which works several times faster than previously available chips . 
Hewlett-Packard Co. became the first company world-wide to announce a product based on the chip earlier this month , but it wo n't start shipping the computers until early next year . 
An Olivetti spokesman said the company 's factories are already beginning to produce the machine , and that it should be available in Europe by December . 
`` What this means is that Europeans will have these machines in their offices before Americans do , '' the spokesman said . 
The new chip `` is a very big step in computing , and it is important that Olivetti be one of the first out on the market with this product , '' said Patricia Meagher Davis , an analyst at James Capel & Co. in London . 
Executives at Olivetti , whose earnings have been steadily sliding over the past couple of years , have acknowledged that in the past they have lagged at getting new technology to market . 
Ms. Davis said the new machines could steal some sales away from Olivetti 's own minicomputers , but would bring new sales among professionals such as engineers , stockbrokers and medical doctors . 
Although Olivetti 's profits tumbled 40 % in the first half of this year , she believes Olivetti 's restructuring last fall and its introduction of new products will begin to bear fruit with an earnings rebound next year , especially if it can fulfill its promise to deliver the new machines by December . 
`` We think the worst is over '' in the European information-technology market , she said . 
Depending on the type of software and peripherals used , the machines can serve either as the main computer in a network of many terminals ( a role usually filled by a minicomputer ) , as a technical workstation or as a very fast personal computer . 
`` It 's the missing link '' in Olivetti 's product line between small personal computers and higher-priced minicomputers , the Olivetti spokesman said . 
He added that Olivetti will continue making its LSX minicomputer line . 
The machines will cost around $ 16,250 on average in Europe . 
The Intel 486 chip can process 15 million instructions per second , or MIPS , while Intel 's previous 386 chip could handle only 3 to 6 MIPS . 
Olivetti also plans to sell the CP486 computer in the U.S. starting next year through Olivetti USA and through its ISC / Bunker Ramo unit , which specializes in automating bank-branch networks . 
Viatech Inc. said it received approval from the French government for its proposed $ 44.7 million acquisition of Ferembal S.A . 
The approval satisfies the remaining conditions of the purchase , which is expected to close within two weeks . 
erembal , the second-largest maker of food cans in France , had 1988 sales of $ 150 million . 
Ferembal has 930 workers at four canning manufacturing plants and one plastic container facility . 
Viatech makes flexible packaging films and machinery , and materials for the food and pharmaceutical industries . 
Social Security benefits will rise 4.7 % next year to keep pace with inflation , boosting the average monthly benefit to $ 566 from $ 541 , the Department of Health and Human Services announced . 
The higher payments will start with Social Security checks received on Jan. 3 , 1990 . 
Supplemental Security Income payments to the disabled also will rise 4.7 % , starting with checks received on Dec. 29 , 1988 , increasing the maximum SSI payment to $ 386 from $ 368 a month . 
The inflation adjustment also means that the maximum annual level of earnings subject to the wage tax that generates revenue for the Social Security trust fund will rise to $ 50,400 in 1990 from $ 48,000 this year . 
As mandated by law , the tax rate will rise to 7.65 % in 1990 from 7.51 % and wo n't rise any further in the future . 
This means that the maximum yearly Social Security tax paid by workers and employers each will rise $ 250.80 next year to $ 3,855.60 . 
Beneficiaries aged 65 through 69 will be able to earn $ 9,360 without losing any Social Security benefits in 1990 , up from $ 8,880 this year . 
The exempt amount for beneficiaries under 65 will rise to $ 6,840 from $ 6,480 . 
The adjustments reflect the increase in the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers from the third quarter of last year to the third quarter of this year . 
Health-care companies should get healthier in the third quarter . 
Medical-supply houses are expected to report earnings increases of about 15 % on average for the third quarter , despite sales increases of less than 10 % , analysts say . 
To offset sluggish sales growth , companies have been cutting staff , mostly through attrition , and slowing the growth in research and development spending . 
Sales growth in the quarter was slowed by mounting pressure from groups of buyers , such as hospitals , to hold down prices . 
Suppliers were also hurt by the stronger U.S. dollar , which makes sales abroad more difficult . 
In some cases , competition has squeezed margins . 
Becton , Dickinson & Co. , for example , faces stiff competition from a Japanese supplier in the important syringe market . 
The Franklin Lakes , N.J. , company is expected to report sales growth of only 5 % to 6 % , but should still maintain earnings growth of 10 % , says Jerry E. Fuller , an analyst with Duff & Phelps Inc . 
Among the first of the group to post results , Abbott Laboratories said third-quarter net income jumped 14 % to $ 196 million , or 88 cents a share , from $ 172 million , or 76 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales for the company , based in Abbott Park , Ill. , rose 8.3 % to $ 1.31 billion from $ 1.21 billion . 
Baxter International Inc. yesterday reported net climbed 20 % in the third period to $ 102 million , or 34 cents a share , from $ 85 million , or 28 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales for the Deerfield , Ill. , company rose 5.8 % to $ 1.81 billion from $ 1.71 billion . 
But not every company expects to report increased earnings . 
C.R. Bard Inc. yesterday said third-quarter net plunged 51 % to $ 9.9 million , or 18 cents a share , from $ 20 million , or 35 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales fell 1.2 % to $ 190.1 million from $ 192.5 million . 
The Murray Hill , N.J. , company said full-year earnings may be off 33 cents a share because the company removed a catheter from the market . 
In 1988 , the company earned $ 1.38 a share . 
The Food and Drug Administration had raised questions about the device 's design . 
Some analysts add that third-party pressures to reduce health costs will continue to bedevil companies ' bottom lines . 
Takeover speculation , which has been buoying stocks of supply houses , may also ease , says Peter Sidoti , an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc . 
`` As that wanes , you 're going to see the stocks probably wane as well , '' he says . 
Hospitals companies , meanwhile , are reporting improved earnings . 
Bolstered by strong performances by its psychiatric hospitals , National Medical Enterprises Inc. , Los Angeles , reported net income of $ 50 million , or 65 cents a share , for the first quarter ended Aug. 31 , up from $ 41 million , or 56 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Humana Inc. , Louisville , Ky. , also reported favorable results , with net income of $ 66.7 million , or 66 cents , in the fourth quarter ended Aug. 31 , up from $ 58.2 million , or 59 cents , a year earlier . 
Analysts say the handful of hospital companies that are still publicly traded are benefiting from several trends . 
Most important , hospital admission rates are stabilizing after several years of decline . 
Moreover , companies have sold off many of their smaller , less-profitable hospitals and have completed painful restructurings . 
Humana 's revenues , for example , are being boosted by large increases in enrollments in the company 's health maintenance organizations . 
Says Todd Richter , an analyst with Dean Witter Reynolds : `` The shakeout in the publicly traded companies is over . 
Initial claims for regular state unemployment benefits rose to a seasonally adjusted 396,000 during the week ended Oct. 7 from 334,000 the previous week , the Labor Department said . 
The number of people receiving regular state benefits in the week ended Sept. 30 decreased to a seasonally adjusted 2,202,000 , or 2.2 % of those covered by unemployment insurance , from 2,205,000 the previous week , when the insured unemployment rate also was 2.2 % . 
Counting all state and federal benefit programs , the number of people receiving unemployment benefits in the week ended Sept. 30 fell to 1,809,300 from 1,838,200 a week earlier . 
These figures are n't seasonally adjusted . 
A Labor Department spokesman said the unusually high number of initial claims for state unemployment benefits reflects the impact of Hurricane Hugo on southern states , particularly North Carolina and South Carolina . 
The figure also may reflect initial claims filed by striking Nynex Corp. workers who have become eligible for unemployment benefits , the official said . 
Digital Equipment Corp. reported a 32 % decline in net income on a modest revenue gain in its fiscal first quarter , causing some analysts to predict weaker results ahead than they had expected . 
Although the second-largest computer maker had prepared Wall Street for a poor quarter , analysts said they were troubled by signs of flat U.S. orders and a slowdown in the rate of gain in foreign orders . 
The Maynard , Mass. , company is in a transition in which it is trying to reduce its reliance on mid-range machines and establish a presence in workstations and mainframes . 
Net for the quarter ended Sept. 30 fell to $ 150.8 million , or $ 1.20 a share , from $ 223 million , or $ 1.71 a share , a year ago . 
Revenue rose 6.4 % to $ 3.13 billion from $ 2.94 billion . 
Digital said a shift in its product mix toward low-end products and strong growth in workstation sales yielded lower gross margins . 
A spokesman also said margins for the company 's service business narrowed somewhat because of heavy investments made in that sector . 
The lack of a strong product at the high end of Digital 's line was a significant drag on sales . 
Digital hopes to address that with the debut of its first mainframe-class computers next Tuesday . 
The new line is aimed directly at International Business Machines Corp . 
`` Until the new mainframe products kick in , there wo n't be a lot of revenue contribution at the high end , and that 's hurt us , '' said Mark Steinkrauss , Digital 's director of investor relations . 
He said unfavorable currency translations were also a factor in the quarter . 
DEC shares rose $ 1.375 to $ 89.75 apiece in consolidated New York Stock Exchange trading yesterday . 
But analysts said that against the backdrop of a nearly 40-point rise in the Dow Jones Industrial Average , that should n't necessarily be taken as a sign of great strength . 
Some cut their earnings estimates for the stock this year and predicted more efforts to control costs ahead . 
`` I think the next few quarters will be difficult , '' said Steven Milunovich of First Boston . 
`` Margins will remain under pressure , and when the new mainframe does ship , I 'm not sure it will be a big winner . 
'' Mr. Milunovich said he was revising his estimate for DEC 's current year from $ 8.20 a share to `` well below $ 8 , '' although he has n't settled on a final number . 
One troubling aspect of DEC 's results , analysts said , was its performance in Europe . 
DEC said its overseas business , which now accounts for more than half of sales , improved in the quarter . 
It even took the unusually frank step of telling analysts in a morning conference call that orders in Europe were up in `` double digits '' in foreign-currency terms . 
That gain probably translated into about 5 % to 7 % in dollar terms , well below recent quarters ' gains of above 20 % , reckons Jay Stevens of Dean Witter Reynolds . 
`` That was a disappointment '' and a sign of overall computer-market softness in Europe , Mr. Stevens said . 
Marc Schulman , with UBS Securities in New York , dropped his estimate of DEC 's full-year net to $ 6.80 a share from $ 8 . 
Although overall revenues were stronger , Mr. Schulman said , DEC `` drew down its European backlog '' and had flat world-wide orders overall . 
`` The bottom line is that it 's more hand to mouth than it has been before , '' he said . 
Mr. Schulman said he believes that the roll-out of DEC 's new mainframe will `` occur somewhat more leisurely '' than many of his investment colleagues expect . 
He said current expectations are for an entry level machine to be shipped in December , with all of the more sophisticated versions out by June . 
For reasons he would n't elaborate on , he said he 's sure that schedule wo n't be met , meaning less profit impact from the product for DEC in the next few quarters . 
John R. Wilke contributed to this article . 
Colgate Palmolive Co. reported third-quarter net income rose 27 % , bolstered by strong sales in its Latin American business and surprisingly healthy profits from U.S. operations . 
Colgate said net income for the quarter rose to $ 76.7 million , or $ 1.06 a share , on sales that increased 6 % to $ 1.3 billion . 
In the year-earlier period , Colgate posted net income of $ 60.2 million , or 88 cents a share . 
Last year 's results included earnings from discontinued operations of $ 13.1 million , or 19 cents a share . 
Reuben Mark , chairman and chief executive officer of Colgate , said earnings growth was fueled by strong sales in Latin America , the Far East and Europe . 
Results were also bolstered by `` a very meaningful increase in operating profit at Colgate 's U.S. business , '' he said . 
Operating profit at Colgate 's U.S. household products and personal care businesses , which include such well-known brands as Colgate toothpaste and Fab laundry detergent , jumped more than 40 % , the company said . 
Mr. Mark attributed the improvement to cost savings achieved by consolidating manufacturing operations , blending together two sales organizations and more carefully focusing the company 's promotional activities . 
`` We 've done a lot to improve ( U.S. . ) results and a lot more will be done , '' Mr. Mark said . 
`` Improving profitability of U.S. operations is an extremely high priority in the company . '' 
Colgate 's results were at the high end of the range of analysts ' forecasts . 
The scope of the improvement in the U.S. business caught some analysts by surprise . 
The company 's domestic business , especially its household products division , has performed poorly for years . 
Analysts say the earnings improvement came from cutting costs rather than increasing sales . 
For the nine months , net increased 14 % to $ 217.5 million , or $ 3.09 a share . 
Sales rose 7 % to $ 3.8 billion . 
The company earned $ 191.1 million , or $ 2.79 a share , in the year-earlier period . 
Colgate 's 1988 net income included $ 40.1 million , or 59 cents a share , from discontinued operations . 
Colgate sold its hospital supply and home health care business last year . 
Separately , Colgate Wednesday finalized an agreement with MacroChem Corp. , a tiny dental products and pharmaceutical concern based in Billerica , Mass. , to market in the U.S. four of MacroChem 's FDA-approved dental products . 
The products -- sealants and bonding materials used by dentists -- all contain fluoride that is released over time . 
The move is part of a drive to increase Colgate 's business with dentists , a company spokeswoman said . 
Terms of the agreement were n't given . 
USACafes Limited Partnership said it completed the sale of its Bonanza restaurant franchise system to a subsidiary of Metromedia Co. for $ 71 million in cash . 
USACafes , which is nearly half-owned by Sam and Charles Wyly of Dallas , said it will distribute proceeds from the sale to unit holders as a liquidating dividend as soon as possible . 
The Bonanza franchise system , which generates about $ 600 million in sales annually , represented substantially all of the partnership 's assets . 
The sale of the system has been challenged in a class-action suit on behalf of unit holders filed last week in a Delaware court , USACafes said . 
The company said it believes the suit is without merit . 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. unveiled a sweetened pension and early-retirement program for management that it hopes will enable it to save $ 450 million in the next year . 
AT&T also said net income rose 19 % in the third quarter . 
AT&T said its amended pension program will nearly double to 34,000 the number of managers eligible to retire with immediate pension payments . 
AT&T said that based on studies of other companies that have offered retirement plans , it expects about one-third of its eligible managers to retire under the new program . 
AT&T said third-quarter net income grew , despite stiff competition in all of the company 's markets . 
Net income rose to $ 699 million , or 65 cents a share , from the year-earlier $ 587 million , or 55 cents a share . 
Revenue edged up to $ 8.9 billion from $ 8.81 billion . 
The latest period 's net was reduced $ 102 million , or nine cents a share , for a change in depreciation method and concurrent changes in estimates of depreciable lives and net salvage for certain telecommunications equipment . 
The results roughly matched estimates of securities analysts , who were encouraged by AT&T increasing its operating margin to 13 % from 11 % a year ago , because of continued cost-cutting efforts . 
Sales of long-distance services , an extremely competitive market , rose 6.4 % . 
But the growth was partly offset by lower equipment sales and rentals and price cuts on some products . 
Under the amended pension program , AT&T managers who have at least five years of service will have five years added to their age and length of service for pension purposes . 
Managers who retire Dec. 30 will have an additional 15 % added to their monthly pension for as long as five years or age 65 , whichever comes earlier . 
An AT&T spokeswoman said the company would likely replace about one-third of its managers who choose to retire with new employees . 
Analysts hailed the sweetened pension package , which they said had been the subject of rumors for several months . 
`` This tells you AT&T is serious about continuing to manage their cost structure and is committed to 20%-a-year earnings growth , '' said Jack Grubman , an analyst with PaineWebber Inc . 
But other analysts expressed disappointment that the cost-cutting move wo n't result in even greater earnings growth . 
`` This is a good move , but it only gets you to where people 's expectations already are , '' in terms of earnings growth , said Joel D. Gross , an analyst with Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette . 
Mr. Gross said he had hoped that a cost savings of $ 450 million would result in even greater growth than the 20 % annual earnings increase AT&T has told analysts it expects in the future . 
AT&T said the special retirement option will increase fourth-quarter expenses . 
But the company said the amount ca n't be determined until it knows how many managers opt to retire . 
AT&T said the expense increase will be largely offset by a gain from its previously announced plan to swap its holdings in Ing . C. Olivetti & Co. for shares in Cie . Industriali Riunite , an Italian holding company . 
For the nine months , AT&T said net income was $ 1.99 billion , or $ 1.85 a share , up 19 % from $ 1.67 billion , or $ 1.56 a share . 
Revenue gained 3.1 % to $ 26.81 billion from $ 26 billion . 
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange , AT&T shares closed at $ 43.375 , up 87.5 cents . 
When it comes to buying and selling shares , Westridge Capital Management Inc. takes a back seat to no one . 
Every dollar 's worth of stock in the Los Angeles money manager 's portfolio is traded seven or eight times a year , the firm estimates . 
That makes it the most active trader among all the nation 's investment advisers , according to Securities and Exchange Commission filings . 
But wait a second . 
Westridge Capital is an index fund -- the type of stolid long-term investor whose goal is to be nothing more than average . 
Westridge Capital 's frenetic trading reflects the changes sweeping through the previously sleepy world of indexing . 
Indexing for the most part has involved simply buying and then holding stocks in the correct mix to mirror a stock market barometer , such as Standard & Poor 's 500-stock index , and match its performance . 
Institutional investors have poured $ 210 billion into stock and bond indexing as a cheap and easy form of investment management that promises to post average market returns . 
These big investors have flocked to indexing because relatively few `` active '' stock pickers have been able to consistently match the returns of the S&P 500 or other bellwethers , much less beat it . 
And the fees investors pay for indexing run a few pennies for each $ 100 of assets -- a fraction of the cost of active managers . 
That 's because computers do most of the work , and low trading activity keeps a lid on commission costs . 
But today , indexing is moving from a passive investment strategy to an increasingly active one . 
Because index-fund managers are no longer satisfied with merely being average , they have developed `` enhanced '' indexing strategies that are intended to outperform the market as much as three percentage points . 
`` Indexing has been the most single successful investment concept in the last decade , but the index money has been just sort of sitting there , '' says Seth M. Lynn , president of Axe Core Investors Inc. , an indexer based in Tarrytown , N.Y . 
`` Now the interest is in what else can I do with that money . '' 
Among the souped-up indexing strategies : Indexed portfolios can be built around thousands of stocks , or just a few dozen , rather than being restricted to the S&P 500 companies . 
They can ignore the S&P 500 stocks altogether and focus on particular types of stocks , such as smaller companies , those paying high dividends or companies in a particular industry , state or country . 
With today 's computer-driven program trading techniques , index funds can trade back and forth between stock-index futures and the actual stocks making up indexes such as the S&P 500 . 
Futures and options also make it possible to build `` synthetic '' index funds that do n't actually own a single share of stock , but can produce returns that match or exceed the broad stock market . 
One reason for these hybrids is that indexing 's rapid growth is slowing , particularly for those `` plain vanilla '' funds that mirror the S&P 500 . 
`` There is n't a boatload { of big investors } out there still waiting to get into indexing , '' says P. James Kartalia , vice president of ANB Investment Management Co. , Chicago , which offers both indexing and active management services . 
( After tripling in size in the past five years , index funds now hold about 20 % of the stock owned by pension funds . ) 
A further problem is razor-thin profits . 
Plain-vanilla funds have become so commonplace that fees they can charge have plunged to almost nothing , and in some cases are just that . 
To land customers for their well-paying stock custodial business , big banks sometimes will throw in basic indexing services for free . 
`` It 's like getting a free toaster when you open an account , '' says Axe Core 's Mr. Lynn . 
As a result , indexers have been looking for ways to give investors something more than the average for their money . 
And many have been successful , as in the case of the index fund operated by hyper-trader Westridge Capital . 
Westridge Capital has used enhanced indexing techniques to beat the S&P 500 's returns by 2.5 to 3 percentage points over the past four years , with the same risk level as holding the S&P 500 stocks , according to James Carder , the firm 's president . 
Strategies vary for Westridge Capital , which has $ 300 million under management . 
The firm sometimes buys S&P 500 futures when they are selling at a discount to the actual stocks , and will switch back and forth between stocks and stock-index futures to take advantages of any momentary price discrepencies . 
Mr. Carder also goes through periods when he buys stocks in conjunction with options to boost returns and protect against declines . 
And in some months , he buys stock-index futures and not stocks at all . 
`` By their nature , our trades are very short-term and are going to create high turnover , '' Mr. Carder adds . 
`` The more turnover , the better for our clients . '' 
Big indexer Bankers Trust Co. also uses futures in a strategy that on average has added one percentage point to its enhanced fund 's returns . 
J. Thomas Allen , president of Pittsburgh-based Advanced Investment Management Inc. , agrees it 's a good idea to jump between the S&P 500 stocks and futures . 
`` You 're buying the S&P , and you always want to hold the cheapest form of it , '' he says . 
But some indexers make little or no use of futures , saying that these instruments present added risks for investors . 
`` If the futures markets have a problem , then those products could have a problem , '' says John Zumbrunn , managing director of Prudential Insurance Co. of America 's Investment Index Technologies Inc. unit . 
Prudential currently is seeking approval to offer a new fund offering a return equal to the S&P 500 index plus 5\/100 of a percentage point . 
An added feature is that the slighty improved return would be guaranteed by Prudential . 
There are many other strategies to bolster the returns of index funds . 
They include : 
LIMITED RISK FUNDS : 
These guarantee protection against stock market declines while still passing along most gains . 
Here a fund may promise to pay back , say , $ 95 of every $ 100 invested for a year , even if the market goes much lower . 
The fund could invest $ 87 for one year in Treasury bills yielding 8 % to return the guaranteed $ 95 . 
That leaves $ 13 , which could be used to buy S&P 500 options that will nearly match any gain in the S&P index . 
MANAGER REPLICATION FUNDS : 
Say a big investor is interested in growth stocks . 
Instead of hiring one of the many active managers specializing in growth stocks , indexers can design a portfolio around the same stocks ; the portfolio will be maintained by computer , reducing both fees and , in theory , risk ( because of the large number of stocks ) . 
`` We see a lot of interest in those kind of things , '' says Frank Salerno , a vice president of Bankers Trust . 
`` People comfortable with the passive approach are using them for other strategies . '' 
TILT FUNDS : 
This is an index fund with a bet . 
Instead of replicating the S&P 500 or some other index exactly , some stocks are overweighted or underweighted in the portfolio . 
One simple approach is to exclude S&P 500 companies considered bankruptcy candidates ; this can avoid weak sisters , but also can hurt when a company like Chrysler Corp. rebounds . 
Another approach : An investor with $ 100 million might use $ 75 million to buy the S&P 500 index and spend the other $ 25 million on a favorite group of stocks . 
SPECIALIZED FUNDS : 
Indexes can be constructed to serve social goals , such as eliminating the stocks of companies doing business in South Africa . 
Other funds have been designed to concentrate on stocks in a geographic area in order to encourage local investment . 
Pennsylvania State Employees Retirement System , for example , has about $ 130 million invested in a fund of 244 companies that are either Pennsylvania-based or have 25 % of their work forces in the state . 
Short interest on the New York Stock Exchange declined for the second consecutive month , this time 4.2 % , while the American Stock Exchange reported its third consecutive record month of short interest . 
The Big Board reported that short interest dropped to 523,920,214 shares as of Oct. 13 from 547,347,585 shares in mid-September . 
Amex short interest climbed 3 % to 53,496,665 shares from 51,911,566 shares . 
For the year-earlier month , the Big Board reported 461,539,056 shares , indicating a 13.5 % year-to-year rise , while the Amex reported 36,015,194 shares , a 48 % leap . 
Amex short interest has been heading upward since mid-December , with increases in each month since then except at mid-July . 
Traders who sell short borrow stock and sell it , betting that the stock 's price will decline and that they can buy the shares back later at a lower price for return to the lender . 
Short interest is the number of shares that have n't yet been purchased for return to lenders . 
Although a substantial short position reflects heavy speculation that a stock 's price will decline , some investors consider an increase in short interest bullish because the borrowed shares eventually must be bought back . 
Fluctuation in short interest of certain stocks also may be caused partly by arbitraging . 
The figures occasionally include incomplete transactions in restricted stock . 
The level of negative sentiment measured by the Big Board short interest ratio slipped to 3.36 from last month 's 3.38 . 
The ratio is the number of trading days , at the exchange 's average trading volume , that would be required to convert the total short interest position . 
Some analysts suggest , however , that the ratio has weakened in value as an indicator because options and other products can be used to hedge short positions . 
Varity Corp. led the Big Board list of largest short volumes with 12,822,563 shares . 
Varity has proposed to acquire K-H Corp. , consisting of the auto parts division and some debt of Fruehauf Corp. , for $ 577.3 million of cash and securities . 
Chemical Waste Management posted the biggest increase in short volume on the New York exchange , up 3,383,477 shares to 5,267,238 . 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. , the entity formed from the recent acquisition of Squibb Corp. by Bristol-Myers Co. , logged the largest volume decline , 7,592,988 shares , to 12,017,724 . 
Short interest in International Business Machines Corp. plunged to 1,425,035 shares from 2,387,226 shares a month earlier . 
Also closely watched is Exxon Corp. , where short interest slid to 4,469,167 shares from 5,088,774 . 
On a percentage basis , Germany Fund Inc. led the gainers , leaping to 67,972 shares from three shares . 
TransCanada PipeLines Ltd. led the percentage decliners , dropping to 59 shares from 183,467 . 
The Amex short interest volume leader again was Texas Air Corp. , rising to 3,820,634 shares from 3,363,949 . 
Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. posted the largest volume increase , 552,302 shares , to 2,157,656 . 
The company is under an investigation concerning procedures to gain Food and Drug Administration approval of generic drugs . 
Bolar has denied any wrongdoing . 
The largest volume drop -- down 445,645 shares to 141,903 -- came in shares represented by B.A.T Industries PLC 's American depositary receipts . 
The company is facing a takeover proposal from the financier Sir James Goldsmith . 
First Iberian Fund led the percentage increases , rising to 73,100 shares from 184 . 
Nelson Holdings International Ltd. dropped the most on a percentage basis , to 1,000 shares from 255,923 . 
The adjacent tables show the Big Board and Amex issues in which a short interest position of at least 100,000 shares existed as of mid-October or in which there was a short position change of at least 50,000 shares since mid-September . 
Your Oct. 12 editorial `` Pitiful , Helpless Presidency ? '' correctly states that I was critical of the Bush administration 's failure to have any plan in place to respond in a timely fashion to the opportunities to oust Manuel Noriega presented by the attempted military coup on Oct. 3 . 
You are absolutely wrong , however , in opining that this position is some kind of `` flip-flop , '' something newly arrived at as a result of reading the opinion polls . 
My position is one founded on both the facts and the law . 
Although you may have forgotten , public opinion about Gen. Noriega is where it is in large measure because of my investigation of his years of involvement in narcotics smuggling ( and simultaneous work as a U.S. operative ) . 
The public made up its mind about Gen. Noriega largely as a result of the hearings I chaired in the Subcommittee on Terrorism and Narcotics of the Foreign Relations Committee on Feb. 8 , 9 , 10 and 11 , 1988 , and again on April 4 , 1988 . 
It was during those hearings that the nation first learned the breadth and depth of Gen. Noriega 's criminality , and of his enduring relationships with a variety of U.S. government agencies . 
Those hearings also highlighted how Gen. Noriega was able to use his relationships with these agencies to delay U.S. action against him , and to exploit the administration 's obsession with overthrowing the Sandinistas to protect his own drug-dealing . 
As former Ambassador to Costa Rica Francis J. McNeil testified before the subcommittee , the Reagan administration knew that Gen. Noriega was involved with narcotics , but made a decision in the summer of 1986 `` to put Gen. Noriega on the shelf until Nicaragua was settled . '' 
As the report issued by the subcommittee concluded , `` Our government did nothing regarding Gen. Noriega 's drug business and substantial criminal involvement because the first priority was the Contra war . 
This decision resulted in at least some drugs entering the United States as a hidden cost of the war . '' 
Unfortunately , this problem continued even after Gen. Noriega 's indictment . 
Throughout 1988 and this year , I and others in Congress have pressed the U.S. to develop a plan for pushing this `` narcokleptocrat '' out of Panama . 
Regrettably , two administrations in a row have been unwilling and unable to develop any plan , military or economic , for supporting the Panamanian people in their attempts to restore democracy . 
Sen. John Kerry ( D. , Mass . ) 
For Vietnamese , these are tricky , often treacherous , times . 
After years of hesitation , economic and political reform was embraced at the end of 1986 , but ringing declarations have yet to be translated into much action . 
Vietnam is finding that turning a stagnant socialist order into a dynamic free market does n't come easy . 
Here is how three Vietnamese are coping with change : 
The Tire King 
Nguyen Van Chan is living proof that old ways die hard . 
Mr. Chan used to be an oddity in Hanoi : a private entrepreneur . 
His business success made him an official target in pre-reform days . 
Mr. Chan , now 64 years old , invented a fountain pen he and his family produced from plastic waste . 
Later , he marketed glue . 
Both products were immensely popular . 
For his troubles , Mr. Chan was jailed three times between 1960 and 1974 . 
Though his operation was registered and used only scrap , he was accused of conducting illegal business and possessing illegal materials . 
Once he was held for three months without being charged . 
Things were supposed to change when Vietnam 's economic reforms gathered pace , and for awhile they did . 
After years of experimenting , Mr. Chan produced a heavy-duty bicycle tire that outlasted its state-produced rival . 
By 1982 , he was selling thousands of tires . 
Newspapers published articles about him , and he was hailed as `` the tire king . '' 
His efforts earned a gold medal at a national exhibition -- and attracted renewed attention from local authorities . 
District police in 1983 descended on his suburban home , which he and his large family used as both residence and factory , and demanded proof the house and equipment were his . 
He produced it . 
`` That was the first time they lost and I won , '' he says . 
He was further questioned to determine if he was `` a real working man or an exploiter . '' 
Says Mr. Chan : `` When I showed it was from my own brain , they lost for the second time . '' 
But a few days later the police accused him of stealing electricity , acquiring rubber without permission and buying stolen property . 
Warned he was to be jailed again , he fled to the countryside . 
His family was given three hours to leave before the house and contents were confiscated . 
With only the clothes they were wearing , family members moved to a home owned by one of Mr. Chan 's sons . 
After six months on the run , Mr. Chan learned the order for his arrest had been canceled . 
He rejoined his family in January 1984 and began the long struggle for justice , pressing everyone from Hanoi municipal officials to National Assembly deputies for restoration of his rights . 
He and his family kept afloat by repairing bicycles , selling fruit and doing odd jobs . 
Mr. Chan achieved a breakthrough in 1987 -- and became a minor celebrity again -- when his story was published in a weekly newspaper . 
In 1988 , 18 months after the sixth congress formally endorsed family-run private enterprise , district authorities allowed Mr. Chan to resume work . 
By late last year he was invited back as `` the tire king '' to display his products at a national exhibition . 
National leaders stopped by his stand to commend his achievements . 
Mr. Chan now produces 1,000 bicycle and motorbike tires a month and 1,000 tins of tire-patching glue in the son 's small house . 
Eighteen people pack the house 's two rooms -- the Chans , four of their 10 children with spouses , and eight of 22 grandchildren . 
Most sleep on the floor . 
Come daybreak , eight family members and two other workers unroll a sheet of raw rubber that covers the floor of the house and spills out onto the street . 
The primitive operations also burst out the back door into a small courtyard , where an ancient press squeezes rubber solution into a flat strip and newly made tires are cooled in a bathtub filled with water . 
Mr. Chan talks optimistically of expanding , maybe even moving into the import-export field . 
First , however , he has unfinished business . 
When district authorities allowed him to resume manufacturing , they released only one of his machines . 
They did n't return the rubber stocks that represent his capital . 
Nor did they return his house and contents , which he values at about $ 44,000 . 
He wants to recover more than just his property , though . 
`` I want my dignity back , '' he says . 
The Editor 
Nguyen Ngoc seemed an obvious choice when the Vietnamese Writers Association was looking for a new editor to reform its weekly newspaper , Van Nghe . 
After the sixth congress , journalists seized the opportunity provided by the liberalization to probe previously taboo subjects . 
Mr. Ngoc , 57 years old , had solid reformist credentials : He had lost his official position in the association in he early 1980s because he questioned the intrusion of politics into literature . 
Appointed editor in chief in July 1987 , Mr. Ngoc rapidly turned the staid Van Nghe into Vietnam 's hottest paper . 
Circulation soared as the weekly went way beyond standard literary themes to cover Vietnamese society and its ills . 
Readers were electrified by the paper 's audacity and appalled by the dark side of life it uncovered . 
One article recounted a decade-long struggle by a wounded soldier to prove , officially , he was alive . 
Another described how tax-collection officials in Thanh Hoa province one night stormed through homes and confiscated rice from starving villagers . 
The newspaper also ran a series of controversial short stories by Nguyen Huy Thiep , a former history teacher , who stirred debate over his interpretation of Vietnamese culture and took a thinly veiled swipe at writers who had blocked his entry into their official association . 
Van Nghe quickly made influential enemies . 
`` Those who manage ideology and a large number of writers reacted badly '' to the restyled paper , says Lai Nguyen An , a literary critic . 
After months of internal rumblings , Mr. Ngoc was fired last December . 
His dismissal triggered a furor among intellectuals that continues today . 
`` Under Mr. Ngoc , Van Nghe protected the people instead of the government , '' says Nguyen Duy , a poet who is the paper 's bureau chief for southern Vietnam . 
`` The paper reflected the truth . 
For the leadership , that was too painful to bear . '' 
The ` Billionaire ' 
Nguyen Thi Thi is Vietnam 's entrepreneur of the 1980s . 
Her challenge is to keep her fledgling empire on top in the 1990s . 
Mrs. Thi did n't wait for the reforms to get her start . 
She charged ahead of the government and the law to establish Hochiminh City Food Co. as the biggest rice dealer in the country . 
Her success , which included alleviating an urban food shortage in the early 1980s , helped persuade Hanoi to take the reform path . 
Her story is becoming part of local folklore . 
A lifelong revolutionary with little education who fought both the French and the U.S.-backed Saigon regime , she switched effortlessly to commerce after the war . 
Her instincts were capitalistic , despite her background . 
As she rode over regulations , only her friendship with party leaders , including Nguyen Van Linh , then Ho Chi Minh City party secretary , kept her out of jail . 
Following Mr. Linh 's appointment as secretary-general of the party at the sixth congress , Mrs. Thi has become the darling of `` doi moi '' , the Vietnamese version of perestroika . 
The authorities have steered foreign reporters to her office to see an example of `` the new way of thinking . '' 
Foreign publications have responded with articles declaring her Vietnam 's richest woman . 
`` Some people call me the communist billionaire , '' she has told visitors . 
Actually , 67-year-old Mrs. Thi is about as poor as almost everyone else in this impoverished land . 
She has indeed turned Hochiminh City Food into a budding conglomerate , but the company itself remains state-owned . 
She manages it with the title of general-director . 
The heart of the business is the purchase of rice and other commodities , such as corn and coffee , from farmers in the south , paying with fertilizer , farm tools and other items . 
Last year , Hochiminh City Food says it bought two million metric tons of unhusked rice , more than 10 % of the country 's output . 
The company operates a fleet of trucks and boats to transport the commodities to its warehouses . 
A subsidiary company processes commodities into foods such as instant noodles that are sold with the rice through a vast retail network . 
In recent years , Mrs. Thi has started to diversify the company , taking a 20 % stake in newly established , partly private Industrial and Commercial Bank , and setting up Saigon Petro , which owns and operates Vietnam 's first oil refinery . 
Mrs. Thi says Hochiminh City Food last year increased pretax profit 60 % to the equivalent of about $ 2.7 million on sales of $ 150 million . 
She expects both revenue and profit to gain this year . 
She is almost cavalier about the possibility Vietnam 's reforms will create rivals on her home turf . 
`` I do n't mind the competition inside the country , '' she says . 
`` I am only afraid that with Vietnam 's poor-quality products we ca n't compete with neighboring countries . 
The earthquake that hit the San Francisco Bay area is n't likely to result in wholesale downgrading of bond ratings , officials at the two major rating agencies said . 
Standard & Poor 's Corp. is reviewing debt issued by 12 California counties , and `` there are potential isolated problems , '' said Hyman Grossman , a managing director . 
The agency is preparing a report , to be issued today , on the earthquake 's impact on the property- and casualty-insurance industry . 
The only securities so far to be singled out are those issued by Bay View Federal Savings & Loan . 
Moody 's Investors Service Inc. said it is reviewing , with an eye toward a possible downgrade , the ratings on Bay View Federal bonds , long-term deposits and the preferred-stock rating of its parent company , Bay View Capital Corp . 
As for property and casualty insurers , Moody 's said `` preliminary estimates suggest that losses should not have a significant impact on most insurers ' financial condition , '' but it `` raises concerns about potentially substantial risks '' longer-term . 
`` Losses from the earthquake are expected to be of similar magnitude to those of Hurricane Hugo , '' according to Moody 's . 
Your Oct. 5 editorial `` A Democratic Tax Cut '' contained an error . 
In the third paragraph it referred to the senators seeking loophole suggestions from lobbyists for various sectors of the economy . 
Among them , `` banana farmers . '' 
The only significant commercial banana farmers in the U.S. are in Hawaii . 
The Hawaii Banana Industry Association , to which nearly all of them belong , has no lobbyist . 
Thomas V. Reese Sr . Maui Banana Co . 
Western Digital Corp. reported a net loss of $ 2.7 million , or nine cents a share , for its first quarter ended Sept. 30 , citing factors as varied as hurricane damage , an advance in graphics technology and the strengthening dollar . 
In the year-ago period , the company earned $ 12.9 million , or 45 cents a share , on sales of $ 247 million . 
Sales for the just-ended period fell to about $ 225 million , the maker of computer parts said . 
Nonetheless , Chairman Roger W. Johnson said he expects the company to be profitable in the current quarter . 
`` We are positioned to come through , '' he said , noting that the company 's backlog was up from the previous quarter . 
In its second quarter last year , Western Digital earned $ 12.7 million , or 44 cents a share , on sales of $ 258.4 million . 
Mr. Johnson said Western Digital 's plant in Puerto Rico was affected by Hurricane Hugo , losing three days ' production because of the storm , which wrecked much of the Caribbean island 's infrastructure . 
Although the plant itself was n't damaged , Mr. Johnson said millions of dollars in first-quarter revenue were lost . 
The revenue will be regained in the current period , he added . 
There are no plans to initiate a common stock dividend , Mr. Johnson said , explaining that the board continues to believe shareholders are best served by reinvesting excess cash . 
Mr. Johnson said the first-quarter loss also heavily reflected a rapid change in graphics technology that left reseller channels with too many of the old computer graphics boards and too few new monitors compatible with the new graphics boards . 
Western Digital does n't make the monitors . 
An accelerating move by personal computer manufacturers ' to include advanced graphics capabilities as standard equipment further dampened reseller purchases of Western Digital 's equipment . 
`` The other areas of the business -- storage and microcomputers -- were very good , '' Mr. Johnson said . 
He said Western Digital has reacted swiftly to the movement to video graphics array , VGA , graphics technology from the old enhanced graphics adapter , EGA , which has a lower resolution standard , technology and now is one of the leading producers of these newer units . 
Other makers of video controller equipment also were caught in the EGA-VGA shift , he said , `` but we were able to respond much more quickly . '' 
Still , Mr. Johnson said , `` our stock is grossly undervalued . '' 
He said the company has cut operating expenses by about 10 % over the last few quarters , while maintaining research and development at about 8 % to 9 % of sales . 
As part of its reorganization this week , Western Digital has divided its business into two segments -- storage products , including controllers and disk drives ; and microcomputer products , which include graphics , communications and peripheral control chips . 
Graphics , communications and peripheral control chips were combined because , increasingly , multiple functions are being governed by a single chip . 
Storage , which includes computer controllers and 3.5-inch disk drives , represents nearly two-thirds of the company 's business . 
Disk drives , which allow a computer to access its memory , generated 38 % more revenue in the most recent period compared with the fiscal first quarter a year earlier . 
Computer parts are getting ever smaller , Mr. Johnson said , a shrinking that has propelled laptops into position as the fastest-growing segment of the computer business . 
As smaller and more powerful computers continue to be the focus of the industry , he said , Western Digital is strengthening development of laptop parts . 
Next year Western Digital plans to consolidate its operations from 11 buildings in Irvine into two buildings in the same city a new headquarters and , a block away , a modern $ 100 million silicon wafer fabrication plant . 
The plan will help the company in its existing joint manufacturing agreement with AT&T . 
About half of Western Digital 's business is overseas , and Mr. Johnson expects that proportion to continue . 
Plans to dissolve many of the trade barriers within Europe in 1992 creates significant opportunities for the company , he said , particularly since Western Digital already manufactures there . 
Capitalizing on that presence , Western Digital is launching a major effort to develop the embryonic reseller market in Europe . 
Directors of state-owned Banca Nazionale del Lavoro approved a two-step capital-boosting transaction and a change in the bank 's rules that will help it operate more like a private-sector institution . 
Until now , BNL 's top managers and its directors have been appointed by a Treasury decree . 
But under the bank 's proposed statutes , an assembly of shareholders must approve board members . 
The bank 's chairman and director general , who also sit on the board , still would be appointed by the Treasury . 
BNL , which is controlled by the Italian Treasury , was rocked by the disclosure last month that its Atlanta branch extended more than $ 3 billion in unauthorized credits to Iraq . 
The ensuing scandal , in which the bank 's management resigned , has helped renew calls for privatization , or at least an overhaul , of Italy 's banking system , which is about 80 % state-controlled . 
In a related move , the bank also proposed that board representation be linked more closely to the bank 's new shareholding structure . 
BNL called a shareholders ' assembly meeting in December to vote on the proposals . 
BNL has about 75,000 nonvoting shares that are listed on the Milan Stock Exchange . 
The shares were suspended from trading following disclosure of the Atlanta scandal ; Consob , the stock exchange regulatory body , reportedly will decide soon whether to end the trading suspension . 
Switzerland 's wholesale price index increased 0.3 % in September from August , and was up 3.9 % from a year ago , marking the first time this year that the index has fallen below 4 % on a year-to-year basis , the government reported . 
The government attributed the 0.3 % month-to-month rise in the index largely to higher energy prices . 
In August , the index was up 0.2 % from the previous month , and was up 4.5 % on a year-to-year basis . 
The wholesale price index , based on 1963 as 100 , was 180.9 in September . 
American Express Co. posted a 21 % increase in third quarter net income despite a sharp rise in reserves for Third World loans at its banking unit . 
Aided by a sharp gain in its travel business , American Express said net rose to $ 331.8 million , or 77 cents a share , from $ 273.9 million , or 64 cents a share . 
The year-earlier figures included $ 9.9 million , or three cents a share , in income from discontinued operations . 
Income from continuing operations was up 26 % . 
Revenue rose 24 % to $ 6.5 billion from $ 5.23 billion . 
The travel , investment services , insurance and banking concern added $ 110 million to reserves for credit losses at its American Express Bank unit , boosting the reserve to $ 507 million as of Sept. 30 . 
The bank 's Third World debt portfolio totals $ 560 million , down from $ 2.2 billion at the end of 1986 . 
The bank charged off $ 53 million in loans during the quarter . 
At the American Express Travel Related Services Co. unit , net rose 17 % to a record $ 240.8 million on a 19 % revenue increase . 
The figures exclude businesses now organized as American Express Information Services Co . 
American Express card charge volume rose 12 % . 
Travel sales rose 11 % , led by gains in the U.S. . 
At IDS Financial Services , the financial planning and mutual fund unit , net rose 19 % to a record $ 47.6 million on a 33 % revenue gain . 
Assets owned or managed rose 20 % to $ 45 billion , and mutual fund sales rose 45 % in the quarter to $ 923 million . 
American Express Bank earnings fell 50 % to $ 21.3 million from $ 42.5 million despite a 29 % revenue gain . 
The results include $ 106 million of tax benefits associated with previous years ' Third World loan activity , compared with $ 15 million a year earlier . 
Profit rose 38 % at American Express Information Services to $ 21.6 million . 
Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. , as previously reported , had net of $ 65.9 million , reversing a $ 3.5 million loss a year earlier ; its latest results include a $ 37 million gain from the sale of an institutional money management business . 
American Express 's share of Shearson 's earnings was $ 41 million , after preferred stock dividends ; it owns about 68 % of Shearson 's common . 
For the nine months , American Express said net rose 11 % to $ 899.8 million , or $ 2.09 a share , from $ 807.5 million , or $ 1.89 a share . 
Revenue rose 24 % to $ 18.73 billion from $ 15.09 billion . 
Textron Inc. , hampered by a slowdown in its defense sales , reported an 8 % decline in per-share earnings on nearly flat revenue for its third quarter . 
The aerospace and financial services concern said net income fell 5 % to $ 59.5 million from $ 62.8 million . 
Revenue of $ 1.73 billion was almost unchanged from last year 's $ 1.72 billion . 
Per-share net of 66 cents , down from 72 cents , fell by more than overall net because of more shares outstanding . 
The company said that improved results in its financial-services sector were negated by increased costs in its government contract business , lower operating earnings in its commercial-products sector and soft automotive markets . 
Net was aided by a lower income tax rate . 
Profit before taxes fell 17 % to $ 84.4 million from $ 101.4 million . 
For the nine months , Textron reported net of $ 182.1 million , or $ 2.06 a share , on revenue of $ 5.41 billion . 
A year ago , net was $ 170.4 million , or $ 1.93 a share , on revenue of $ 5.3 billion . 
The nine-month results included a $ 9.5 million special charge in 1989 for an arbitration settlement related to past export sales , and $ 29.7 million in extraordinary charges in 1988 related to a former line of business and early redemption of debt . 
Textron said that nine-months ' results do n't include earnings of Avdel PLC , a British maker of industrial fasteners , but do include interest costs of $ 16.4 million on borrowings related to the proposed purchase of Avdel . 
A federal judge has issued a preliminary injunction against the purchase because of Federal Trade Commission concerns that the transaction would reduce competition in the production of two kinds of rivets . 
For the quarter , Textron said aerospace revenue , including Bell helicopter and jet-engine manufacture , declined 9.8 % to $ 755.9 million from $ 838.3 million , an indication of slowing government defense work . 
As the Hunt brothers ' personal bankruptcy cases sputter into their second year , Minpeco S.A. has proposed a deal to settle its huge claim against the troubled Texas oil men . 
But the plan only threatens to heighten the tension and confusion already surrounding the cases that were filed in September 1988 . 
The Peruvian mineral concern 's $ 251 million claim stems from 1988 jury award in a case stemming from the brothers ' alleged attempts to corner the 1979-80 silver market . 
Minpeco now says it is willing to settle for up to $ 65.7 million from each brother , although the actual amount would probably be much less . 
Although the proposal must be approved by federal Judge Harold C. Abramson , W. Herbert Hunt has agreed to the Peruvian mineral concern 's proposal . 
Nelson Bunker Hunt is considering it , although his attorney says he wo n't do it if the proposal jeopardizes a tentative settlement he has reached with the Internal Revenue Service , which claims the brothers owe $ 1 billion in back taxes and is by far the biggest creditor in both cases . 
The tentative agreement between the IRS and Nelson Bunker Hunt is awaiting U.S. Justice Department approval . 
Under it , the former billionaire 's assets would be liquidated with the IRS getting 80 % of the proceeds and the rest being divided among other creditors , including Minpeco and Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. , which is seeking repayment of a $ 36 million loan . 
A similiar proposal has been made in the W. Herbert Hunt case although he and the IRS are at odds over the size of the non-dischargable debt he would have to pay to the government from future earnings . 
In both cases , Minpeco and Manufacturers Hanover have been fighting ferociously over their shares of the pie . 
With support from the IRS , Manufacturers Hanover has filed suit asking Judge Abramson to subordinate Minpeco 's claim to those of Manufacturer Hanover and the IRS . 
Minpeco has threatened a `` volcano '' of litigation if the Manufacturers Hanover Corp. unit attempts to force such a plan through the court . 
Minpeco said it would n't pursue such litigation if its settlement plan in the W. Herbert Hunt case is approved by Judge Abramson , who will consider the proposal at a hearing next week . 
Minpeco attorney Thomas Gorman decribed the plan as one step toward an overall settlement of the W. Herbert Hunt case but Hugh Ray , attorney for Manufacturers Hanover , called it `` silly '' and said he would fight it in court . 
`` The thing is so fluid right now that there 's really no way to say what will happen , '' says Justice Department attorney Grover Hartt III , who represents the IRS in the case . 
`` Developments like this are hard to predict . 
Banc One Corp. said it agreed in principle to buy five branch offices from Trustcorp Inc. , Toledo , Ohio , following the planned merger of Trustcorp into Society Corp. , Cleveland . 
The five offices in Erie and Ottawa counties in northern Ohio have total assets of about $ 88 million , Banc One said . 
The purchase price will be established after Banc One has an opportunity to study the quality of the assets , Banc One said . 
Society Corp. already has branches in the area , and selling the Trustcorp offices could avoid a problem with regulators over excessive concentration of banking in the two counties after the merger of Trustcorp into Society , according to industry sources . 
The merger is scheduled to take place in the 1990 first quarter . 
Stock-market fears and relatively more attractive interest rates pushed money-market mutual fund assets up $ 6.07 billion in the latest week , the sharpest increase in almost two years . 
The 473 funds tracked by the Investment Company Institute , a Washington-based trade group , rose to $ 356.1 billion , a record . 
The $ 6.07 billion increase was the strongest weekly inflow since January 1988 . 
The increase was spread fairly evenly among all three types of funds . 
Individual investors , represented in the general-purpose and broker-dealer fund categories , pulled money from the stock market after its big drop last Friday and put the money into funds , said Jacob Dreyer , vice president and chief economist of the Institute . 
`` Insitutional investors , on the other hand , reacted to the steep decline in yields on direct money-market instruments following the stock-market decline last Friday , '' Mr. Dreyer said . 
Yields on money funds dropped in the week ended Tuesday , according to Donoghue 's Money Fund Report , a Holliston , Mass. , newsletter . 
The average seven-day compounded yield fell to 8.55 % from 8.60 % the week earlier , Donoghue 's said . 
At the auction of six-month U.S. Treasury bills on Monday , the average yield fell to 7.61 % from 7.82 % . 
Likewise , certificates of deposit on average posted lower yields in the week ended Tuesday . 
The 142 institutional-type money funds rose $ 2.23 billion to $ 85.49 billion . 
The 235 general-purpose funds increased $ 2.53 billion to $ 116.56 billion , while 96 broker-dealer funds increased $ 1.3 billion to $ 154.05 billion . 
Domestic lending for real estate and property development was the source of Bank Bumiputra Malaysia Bhd. 's most recent spate of financial troubles , the institution 's executive chairman , Mohamed Basir Ismail , said . 
Speaking to reporters this week after Bank Bumiputra 's shareholders approved a rescue plan , Tan Sri Basir said heavy lending to the property sector rocked the bank when property prices in Malaysia plummeted in 1984-85 . 
He said the bank could n't wait any longer for prices to recover and for borrowers to service their loans . 
So the bank 's board decided to make 1.23 billion Malaysian dollars ( US$ 457 million ) in provisions for interest payments from loans previously recorded as revenue but never actually received by the bank , and to submit a bailout package to replenish the bank 's paid-up capital . 
The predicament , he added , was similar to the Hong Kong 1982-83 property-price collapse , which exposed the involvement of Bank Bumiputra 's former subsidiary in the colony in the largest banking scandal in Malaysia 's history . 
The subsidiary , Bumiputra Malaysia Finance Ltd. , was left with M$ 2.26 billion in bad loans made to Hong Kong property speculators . 
Both episodes wiped out Bank Bumiputra 's shareholders ' funds . 
Each time , the bank 's 90 % shareholder -- Petroliam Nasional Bhd. , or Petronas , the national oil company -- has been called upon to rescue the institution . 
In five years , Petronas , which became the dominant shareholder in a 1984 rescue exercise , has spent about M$ 3.5 billion to prop up the troubled bank . 
Tan Sri Basir said the capital restructuring plan has been approved by Malaysia 's Capital Issues Committee and central bank . 
Malaysia 's High Court is expected to approve the plan . 
Once the plan is approved , Tan Sri Basir said , most of Bank Bumiputra 's nonperforming loans will have been fully provided for and the bank will be on track to report a pretax profit of between M$ 160 million and M$ 170 million for the fiscal year ending March 31 . 
For the previous financial year , the bank would have reported a pretax profit of M$ 168 million if it had n't made provisions for the nonperforming loans , he said . 
Malaysia 's Banking Secrecy Act prohibited the bank from identifying delinquent borrowers , said Tan Sri Basir . 
But public documents indicate 10 % or more of the bank 's provisions were made for foregone interest on a M$ 200 million loan to Malaysia 's dominant political party , the United Malays National Organization , to build its convention and headquarters complex in Kuala Lumpur . 
The loan to UMNO was made in September 1983 . 
`` We lent a lot of money all over the place , '' said Tan Sri Basir , who refused to discuss the bank 's outstanding loans to 
As well as the M$ 1.23 billion in provisions announced on Oct. 6 , the restructuring package covers an additional M$ 450 million in provisions made in earlier years but never reflected in a reduction of the bank 's paid-up capital . 
At the end of the exercise , the cash injection from Petronas will increase the bank 's paid-up capital to M$ 1.15 billion after virtually being wiped out by the new provisions . 
Heidi Ehman might have stepped from a recruiting poster for young Republicans . 
White , 24 years old , a singer in her church choir , she symbolizes a generation that gave its heart and its vote to Ronald Reagan . 
`` I felt kind of safe , '' she says . 
No longer . 
When the Supreme Court opened the door this year to new restrictions on abortion , Ms. Ehman opened her mind to Democratic politics . 
Then a political novice , she stepped into a whirl of `` pro-choice '' marches , house parties and fund-raisers . 
Now she leads a grassroots abortion-rights campaign in Passaic County for pro-choice Democratic gubernatorial candidate James Florio . 
`` This is one where I cross party lines , '' she says , rejecting the anti-abortion stance of Rep. Florio 's opponent , Reagan-Republican Rep. James Courter . 
`` People my age thought it was n't going to be an issue . 
Now it has -- especially for people my age . '' 
Polls bear out this warning , but after a decade of increased Republican influence here , the new politics of abortion have contributed to a world turned upside down for Mr. Courter . 
Unless he closes the gap , Republicans risk losing not only the governorship but also the assembly next month . 
Going into the 1990s , the GOP is paying a price for the same conservative social agenda that it used to torment Democrats in the past . 
This change comes less from a shift in public opinion , which has n't changed much on abortion over the past decade , than in the boundaries of the debate . 
New Jersey 's own highest court remains a liberal bulwark against major restrictions on abortion , but the U.S. Supreme Court ruling , Webster vs. Missouri , has engaged voters across the nation who had been insulated from the issue . 
Before July , pro-choice voters could safely make political decisions without focusing narrowly on abortion . 
Now , the threat of further restrictions adds a new dimension , bringing an upsurge in political activity by abortion-rights forces . 
A recent pro-choice rally in Trenton drew thousands , and in a major reversal , Congress is defying a presidential veto and demanding that Medicaid abortions be permitted in cases of rape and incest . 
`` If Webster had n't happened , you would n't be here , '' Linda Bowker tells a reporter in the Trenton office of the National Organization for Women . 
`` We could have shouted from the rooftops about Courter ... and no one would have heard us . '' 
New Jersey is a proving ground for this aggressive women's-rights movement this year . 
The infusion of activists can bring a clash of cultures . 
In Cherry Hill , the National Abortion Rights Action League , whose goal is to sign up 50,000 pro-choice voters , targets a union breakfast to build labor support for its cause . 
The league organizers seem more a fit with a convention next door of young aerobics instructors in leotards than the beefy union leaders ; `` I wish I could go work out , '' says a slim activist . 
A labor chief speaks sardonically of having to `` man and woman '' Election Day phones . 
No age group is more sensitive than younger voters , like Ms. Ehman . 
A year ago this fall , New Jersey voters under 30 favored George Bush by 56 % to 39 % over Michael Dukakis , according to a survey then by Rutgers University 's Eagleton Institute . 
A matching Eagleton-Newark Star Ledger poll last month showed a complete reversal . 
Voters in the same age group backed Democrat Florio 55 % to 29 % over Republican Courter . 
Abortion alone ca n't explain this shift , but New Jersey is a model of how so personal an issue can become a baseline of sorts in judging a candidate . 
By a 2-to-1 ratio , voters appear more at ease with Mr. Florio 's stance on abortion , and polls indicate his lead widens when the candidates are specifically linked to the issue . 
`` The times are my times , '' says Mr. Florio . 
The Camden County congressman still carries himself with a trademark `` I'm-coming-down-your-throat '' intensity , but at a pause in Newark 's Columbus Day parade recently , he was dancing with his wife in the middle of the avenue in the city 's old Italian-American ward . 
After losing by fewer than 1,800 votes in the 1981 governor 's race , he has prepared himself methodically for this moment , including deciding in recent years he could no longer support curbs on federal funding for Medicaid abortions . 
`` If you 're going to be consistent and say it is a constitutionally protected right , '' he asks , `` how are you going to say an upscale woman who can drive to the hospital or clinic in a nice car has a constitutional right and someone who is not in great shape financially does not ? '' 
Mr. Courter , by comparison , seems a shadow of the confident hawk who defended Oliver North before national cameras at Iran-Contra hearings two years ago . 
Looking back , he says he erred by stating his `` personal '' opposition to abortion instead of assuring voters that he would n't impose his views on `` policy '' as governor . 
It is a distinction that satisfies neither side in the debate . 
`` He does n't know himself , '' Kathy Stanwick of the Abortion Rights League says of Mr. Courter 's position . 
Even abortion opponents , however angry with Mr. Florio , ca n't hide their frustration with the Republican 's ambivalence . 
`` He does n't want to lead the people , '' says Richard Traynor , president of New Jersey Right to Life . 
Moreover , by stepping outside the state 's pro-choice tradition , Mr. Courter aggravates fears that he is too conservative as well on more pressing concerns such as auto insurance rates and the environment . 
He hurt himself further this summer by bringing homosexual issues into the debate ; and by wavering on this issue and abortion , he has weakened his credibility in what is already a mean-spirited campaign on both sides . 
Elected to Congress in 1978 , the 48-year-old Mr. Courter is part of a generation of young conservatives who were once very much in the lead of the rightward shift under Mr. Reagan . 
Like many of his colleagues , he did n't serve in Vietnam in the 1960s yet embraced a hawkish defense and foreign policy -- even voting against a 1984 resolution critical of the U.S. mining of Nicaraguan harbors . 
Jack Kemp and the writers Irving Kristol and George Gilder were influences , and Mr. Courter 's own conservative credentials proved useful to the current New Jersey GOP governor , Thomas Kean , in the 1981 Republican primary here . 
The same partnership is now crucial to Mr. Courter 's fortunes , but the abortion issue is only a reminder of the gap between his record and that of the more moderate , pro-choice Gov. Kean . 
While the Warren County congressman pursued an anti-government , anti-tax agenda in Washington , Gov. Kean was approving increased income and sales taxes at home and overseeing a near doubling in the size of New Jersey 's budget in his eight years in office . 
Kean forces play down any differences with Mr. Courter , but this history makes it harder for the conservative to run against government . 
Mr. Courter 's free-market plan to bring down auto insurance rates met criticism from Gov. Kean 's own insurance commissioner . 
Mr. Courter is further hobbled by a record of votes opposed to government regulation on behalf of consumers . 
Fluent in Spanish from his days in the Peace Corps , Mr. Courter actively courts minority voters but seems oddly over his head . 
He is warm and polished before a Puerto Rican Congress in Asbury Park . 
Yet minutes after promising to appoint Hispanics to high posts in state government , he is unable to say whether he has ever employed any in his congressional office . 
`` I do n't think we do now , '' he says . 
`` I think we did . '' 
Asked the same question after his appearance , Democrat Florio identifies a staff member by name and explains her whereabouts today . 
When he is presented with a poster celebrating the organization 's 20th anniversary , he recognizes a photograph of one of the founders and recalls time spent together in Camden . 
Details and Camden are essential Florio . 
Elected to Congress as a `` Watergate baby '' in 1974 , he ran for governor three years later . 
In the opinion of many , he has n't stopped running since , even though he declined a rematch with Gov. Kean in 1985 . 
His base in South Jersey and on the House Energy and Commerce Committee helped him sustain a network of political-action committees to preserve his edge . 
With limited budgets for television in a high-priced market , Mr. Florio 's higher recognition than his rival is a major advantage . 
More than ever , his pro-consumer and pro-environment record is in sync with the state . 
Auto insurance rates are soaring . 
A toxic-waste-dump fire destroyed part of an interstate highway this summer . 
In Monmouth , an important swing area , Republican freeholders now run on a slogan promising to keep the county `` clean and green . '' 
Mr. Florio savors this vindication , but at age 52 , the congressman is also a product of his times and losses . 
He speaks for the death penalty as if reading from Exodus 21 ; to increase state revenue he focuses not on `` taxes '' but on `` audits '' to cut waste . 
Hard-hitting consultants match ads with Mr. Courter 's team , and Mr. Florio retools himself as the lean , mean Democratic fighting machine of the 1990s . 
Appealing to a young audience , he scraps an old reference to Ozzie and Harriet and instead quotes the Grateful Dead . 
The lyric chosen -- `` long strange night '' -- may be an apt footnote to television spots by both candidates intended to portray each other as a liar . 
The Democratic lawmaker fits a pattern of younger reformers arising out of old machines , but his ties to Camden remain a sore point because of the county 's past corruption . 
His campaign hierarchy is chosen from elsewhere in the state , and faced with criticism of a sweetheart bank investment , he has so far blunted the issue by donating the bulk of his profits to his alma mater , Trenton State College . 
Mr. Florio 's forcefulness on the abortion issue after the Webster ruling divides some of his old constituency . 
Pasquale Pignatelli , an unlikely but enthusiastic pipe major in an Essex County Irish bagpipe band , speaks sadly of Mr. Florio . 
`` I am a devout Catholic , '' says Mr. Pignatelli , a 40-year-old health officer . 
`` I ca n't support him because of abortion . '' 
Bill Wames Sr. , 72 , is Catholic too , but unfazed by Mr. Florio 's stand on abortion . 
A security guard at a cargo terminal , he wears a Sons of Italy jacket and cap celebrating `` The US 1 Band . '' 
`` I still think the woman has the right to do with her body as she pleases , '' he says . 
`` If you want more opinions ask my wife . 
She has lots of opinions . 
Consumer prices rose a surprisingly moderate 0.2 % in September , pushed up mostly by a jump in clothing costs , the Labor Department reported . 
Energy costs , which drove wholesale prices up sharply during the month , continued to decline at the retail level , pulling down transportation and helping to ease housing costs . 
The report was the brightest news the financial markets had seen since before the stock market plunged more than 190 points last Friday . 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average rallied on the news , closing 39.55 points higher at 2683.20 . 
Bond prices also jumped as traders appeared to read the data as a sign that interest rates may fall . 
But many economists were not nearly as jubilant . 
The climb in wholesale energy prices is certain to push up retail energy prices in the next few months , they warned . 
They also said the dollar is leveling off after a rise this summer that helped to reduce the prices of imported goods . 
`` I think inflation is going to pick up through the fall , '' said Joel Popkin , a specialist on inflation who runs an economic consulting firm here . 
`` It has been in what I would describe as a lull for the past several months . '' 
`` We 've had whopping declines in consumer energy prices in each of the past three months , and at the wholesale level those are fully behind us now , '' said Jay Woodworth , chief domestic economist at Bankers Trust Co. in New York . 
Because wholesale energy prices shot up by a steep 6.5 % last month , many analysts expected energy prices to rise at the consumer level too . 
As a result , many economists were expecting the consumer price index to increase significantly more than it did . 
But retail energy prices declined 0.9 % in September . 
Though analysts say competition will probably hold down increases in retail energy prices , many expect some of the wholesale rise to be passed along to the consumer before the end of the year . 
Still , some analysts insisted that the worst of the inflation is behind . 
`` It increasingly appears that 1987-88 was a temporary inflation blip and not the beginning of a cyclical inflation problem , '' argued Edward Yardeni , chief economist at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York . 
In both 1987 and 1988 , consumer prices rose 4.4 % . 
A run-up in world oil prices last winter sent consumer prices soaring at a 6.7 % annual rate in the first five months of this year , but the subsequent decline in energy prices has pulled the annual rate back down to 4.4 % . 
Mr. Yardeni predicted that world business competition will continue to restrain prices . 
`` The bottom line is , it seems to me that the economic environment has become very , very competitve for a lot of businesses , '' he said . 
`` Back in 1987-88 , business was operating at fairly tight capacity , so businesses felt they could raise prices . '' 
Now , he said , a slowdown in economic activity has slackened demand . 
The mild inflation figures renewed investors ' hopes that the Federal Reserve will ease its interest-rate stance . 
The steep climb in producer prices reported last Friday fostered pessimism about lower interest rates and contributed to the stock market 's 6.9 % plunge that day . 
In the past several days , however , the U.S. 's central bank has allowed a key interest rate to fall slightly to try to stabilize the markets . 
Analysts say Fed policy makers have been wary of relaxing credit too much because they were still uncertain about the level of inflation in the economy . 
Excluding the volatile categories of energy and food -- leaving what some economists call the core inflation rate -- consumer prices still rose only 0.2 % in September . 
Transportation costs actually fell 0.5 % , and housing costs gained only 0.1 % . 
Apparel prices rocketed up 1.7 % , but that was after three months of declines . 
Medical costs continued their steep ascent , rising 0.8 % after four consecutive months of 0.7 % increases . 
Car prices , another area that contributed to the steep rise in the wholesale index last month , still showed declines at the consumer level . 
They dropped 0.4 % as dealers continued to offer rebates to attract customers . 
Food prices rose 0.2 % for the second month in a row , far slower than the monthly rises earlier in the year . 
Separately , the Labor Department reported that average weekly earnings rose 0.3 % in September , after adjusting for inflation , following a 0.7 % decline in August . 
All the numbers are adjusted for seasonal fluctuations . 
Here are the seasonally adjusted changes in the components of the Labor Department 's consumer price index for September . 
After watching interest in the sport plummet for years , the ski industry is trying to give itself a lift . 
Across the country , resorts are using everything from fireworks to classical-music concerts to attract new customers . 
Some have built health spas , business centers and shopping villages so visitors have more to do than ski . 
And this week , the industry 's efforts will go national for the first time when it unveils a $ 7 million advertising campaign . 
Such efforts -- unheard of only a few years ago -- are the latest attempts to revive the sagging $ 1.76 billion U.S. ski industry . 
Since the start of the decade , lift-ticket sales have grown only 3 % a year on average , compared with 16 % annual growth rates in the '60s and '70s . 
Last season , lift-ticket sales fell for the first time in seven years . 
By some estimates , nearly a fourth of all U.S. ski areas have been forced to shut down since the early '80s . 
Competition and mounting insurance and equipment costs have been the undoing of many resorts . 
But another big problem has been the aging of baby boomers . 
Skiing , after all , has mainly been for the young and daring and many baby boomers have outgrown skiing or have too many family responsibilities to stick with the sport . 
In its new ad campaign , created by D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles Inc. , Chicago , the ski industry is trying to change its image as a sport primarily for young white people . 
One 60-second TV spot features a diverse group of skiers gracefully gliding down sun-drenched slopes : senior citizens , minorities , families with children -- even a blind skier . 
`` Ski school is great , '' cries out a tot , bundled in a snowsuit as he plows down a bunny slope . 
`` You 'll never know 'til you try , '' says a black skier . 
`` We used to show some hot-dog skier in his twenties or thirties going over the edge of a cliff , '' says Kathe Dillmann , a spokeswoman for the United Ski Industries Association , the trade group sponsoring the campaign . 
Ski promotions have traditionally avoided the touchy issue of safety . 
But the new commercials deal with it indirectly by showing a woman smiling as she tries to get up from a fall . 
`` We wanted to show it 's okay if you fall , '' says Ms. Dillmann . 
`` Most people think if you slip , you 'll wind up in a body cast . '' 
The ad campaign represents an unusual spirit of cooperation among resorts and ski equipment makers ; normally , they only run ads hyping their own products and facilities . 
But in these crunch times for the ski industry , some resorts , such as the Angel Fire , Red River and Taos ski areas in New Mexico , have even started shuttle-busing skiers to each other 's slopes and next year plan to sell tickets good for all local lifts . 
Many resorts also are focusing more on the service side of their business . 
Since 40 % of skiers are parents , many slopes are building nurseries , expanding ski schools and adding entertainment for kids . 
Vail , Colo. , now has a playland that looks like an old mining town ; kids can ski through and pan for fool 's gold . 
For $ 15 , they can enjoy their own nightly entertainment , with dinner , without mom and dad . 
A few years ago , parents usually had to hire a sitter or take turns skiing while one spouse stayed with the children . 
`` Most parents who had to go through that never came back , '' says Michael Shannon , president of Vail Associates Inc. , which owns and operates the Vail and nearby Beaver Creek resorts . 
To make skiing more convenient for time-strapped visitors , several resorts are buying or starting their own travel agencies . 
In one phone call , ski buffs can make hotel and restaurant reservations , buy lift tickets , rent ski equipment and sign up for lessons . 
And resorts are adding other amenities , such as pricey restaurants , health spas and vacation packages with a twist . 
During Winter Carnival week , for example , visitors at Sunday River in Maine can take a hot-air balloon ride . 
`` People these days want something else to do besides ski and sit in the bar , '' says Don Borgeson , executive director of Angel Fire , N.M. 's Chamber of Commerce . 
The ski industry hopes to increase the number of skiers by 3.5 million to about 21.7 million in the next five years with its latest ads and promotions . 
But some think that 's being overly optimistic . 
For one thing , it may be tough to attract people because skiing is still expensive : a lift ticket can cost up to $ 35 a day and equipment prices are rising . 
And most vacationers still prefer a warm climate for their winter excursions . 
An American Express Co. survey of its travel agents revealed that only 34 % believe their clients will pick a trip this winter based on the availability of winter sports , as opposed to 69 % who think that warm-weather sports will be the deciding factor . 
`` Even if they could bring in that many new skiers , I do n't know if { the industry } could handle that kind of an increase , '' says I. William Berry , editor and publisher of the Ski Industry Letter in Katonah , N.Y . 
`` Most people will come on the weekend , the slopes will be overcrowded and then these { new skiers } wo n't come back . 
They did n't play the third game of the World Series on Tuesday night as scheduled , and they did n't play it on Wednesday or Thursday either . 
But you knew that , did n't you ? 
They are supposed to play the game next Tuesday , in Candlestick Park here . 
The theory is that the stadium , damaged by Tuesday 's earthquake , will be repaired by then , and that people will be able to get there . 
Like just about everything else , that remains to be seen . 
Aftershocks could intervene . 
But , at least , the law of averages should have swung to the favorable side . 
It may seem trivial to worry about the World Series amid the destruction to the Bay Area wrought by Tuesday 's quake , but the name of this column is `` On Sports , '' so I feel obliged to do so . 
You might be interested to know that baseball , not survival , appeared to be the first thought of most of the crowd of 60,000-odd that had gathered at Candlestick at 5:04 p.m. Tuesday , a half-hour before game time , when the quake struck . 
As soon as the tremor passed , many people spontaneously arose and cheered , as though it had been a novel kind of pre-game show . 
One fan , seated several rows in front of the open , upper-deck auxiliary press section where I was stationed , faced the assembled newsies and laughingly shouted , `` We arranged that just for you guys ! '' 
I thought and , I 'm sure , others did : `` You should n't have bothered . '' 
I 'd slept through my only previous brush with natural disaster , a tornado 15 or so summers ago near Traverse City , Mich. , so I was unprepared for one reaction to such things : the urge to talk about them . 
Perhaps primed by the daily diet of radio and TV reporters thrusting microphones into people 's faces and asking how they `` feel '' about one calamity or another , fellow reporters and civilians who spied my press credential were eager to chat . 
`` It felt like I was on a station platform and a train went by , '' said one man , describing my own reaction . 
A women said she saw the park 's light standards sway . 
A man said he saw the upper rim undulate . 
I saw neither . 
Dictates of good sense to the contrary not withstanding , the general inclination was to believe that the disturbance would be brief and that ball would be played . 
`` I was near the top of the stadium , and saw a steel girder bow six feet from where I sat , but I stayed put for 10 or 15 minutes , '' confessed a friend . 
`` I guess I thought , ` This is the World Series and I 'm not gon na wimp out ! ' '' 
Here in the Global Village , though , folks do not stay uninformed for long . 
Electrical power was out in still-daylighted Candlestick Park , but battery-operated radios and television sets were plentiful . 
Within a few minutes , the true extent of the catastrophe was becoming clear . 
Its Richter Scale measurement was reported as 6.5 , then 6.9 , then 7.0 . 
A section of the Bay Bridge had collapsed , as had a part of Interstate Highway 880 in Oakland . 
People had died . 
At 5:40 p.m. , scheduled game time having passed , some fans chanted `` Let 's Play Ball . '' 
No longer innocent , they qualified as fools . 
The stadium was ordered evacuated soon afterward ; the announcement , made over police bullhorns , cited the power outage , but it later was revealed that there also had been damage of the sort reported by my friend . 
Outside , I spotted two young men lugging blocks of concrete . 
`` Pieces of Candlestick , '' they said . 
The crowd remained good natured , even bemused . 
TV reporters interviewed fans in the parking lots while , a few feet away , others watched the interviews on their portable TVs . 
The only frenzy I saw was commercial : Booths selling World Series commemorative stamps and dated postmarks were besieged by fledgling speculators who saw future profit in the items . 
The traffic jam out of the park was monumental . 
It took me a half-hour to move 10 feet from my parking spot in an outer lot to an aisle , and an additional hour to reach an inner roadway a half-block away . 
The six-mile trip to my airport hotel that had taken 20 minutes earlier in the day took more than three hours . 
At my hotel , the Westin , power was out , some interior plaster had broken loose and there had been water damage , but little else . 
With Garpian randomness , a hotel across the street , the Amfac , had been hit harder : A large sheet of its concrete facade and several window balconies were torn away . 
The Westin staff had , kindly , set out lighted candles in the ballroom , prepared a cold-cuts buffet and passed around pillows and blankets . 
I fell asleep on the lobby floor , next to a man wearing a Chicago Cubs jacket . 
I expected him to say , `` I told you so , '' but he already was snoring . 
The journalistic consensus was that the earthquake made the World Series seem unimportant . 
My response was that sports rarely are important , only diverting , and the quake merely highlighted that fact . 
Should the rest of the Series be played at all ? 
Sure . 
The quake and baseball were n't related , unlike the massacre of athletes that attended the 1972 Olympics . 
That heavily politicized event learned nothing from the horrifying experience , and seems doomed to repeat it . 
Two ironies intrude . 
This has been widely dubbed the BART Series , after the local subway line , and the Bay Bridge Series . 
Flags fly at half-staff for the death of Bart Giamatti , the late baseball commissioner , and now the Bay Bridge lies in ruins . 
A Series that was shaping up as the dullest since the one-sided Detroit-over-San Diego go of 1984 has become memorable in the least fortunate way . 
Still , its edge is lost . 
It now will be played mostly for the record , and should be wrapped up as quickly as possible , without `` off '' days . 
And I will never again complain about a rainout . 
The disarray in the junk-bond market that began last month with a credit crunch at Campeau Corp. has offered commercial banks a golden opportunity to play a greater role in financing billion-dollar takeovers . 
But two big New York banks seem to have kicked those chances away , for the moment , with the embarrassing failure of Citicorp and Chase Manhattan Corp. to deliver $ 7.2 billion in bank financing for a leveraged buy-out of United Airlines parent UAL Corp . 
For more than a decade , banks have been pressing Congress and banking regulators for expanded powers to act like securities firms in playing Wall Street 's lucrative takeover game , from giving mergers advice all the way to selling and trading high-yield junk bonds . 
Those expanded powers reached their zenith in July when Bankers Trust New York Corp. provided mergers advice , an equity investment and bank loans for the $ 3.65 billion leveraged buy-out of Northwest Airlines parent NWA Inc . 
One of the major selling points used by Los Angeles financier Alfred Checchi in getting the takeover approved was that the deal did n't include any junk bonds . 
That was seen as an advantage in lobbying airline employees and Washington regulators for approval of the contested takeover . 
All $ 3.35 billion in debt for the deal was supplied by banks . 
Charles Nathan , co-head of mergers and acquisitions at Salomon Brothers Inc. , says it is natural for banks to try to expand beyond their bread-and-butter business of providing senior debt for buy-outs . 
But the UAL collapse , he says , `` may tell you it 's not going to work that easily . '' 
David Batchelder , a mergers adviser in La Jolla , Calif. , who aided Los Angeles investor Marvin Davis on the bids which put both UAL and NWA in play as takeover candidates this year , says that banks have been `` preparing to play a larger and larger role in acquisition financing . '' 
Mr. Batchelder says that in the past , banks would normally have loaned 65 % of a total buy-out price , with the loans secured by the target company 's assets . 
Another 20 % of the borrowed funds would come from the sale to investors of junk bonds , which offer less security and typically carry higher yields than bank loans . 
Mr. Checchi 's purchase of NWA , Mr. Batchelder notes , `` was probably the most aggressive to date , '' with bank debt at 85 % of the purchase price . 
But Mr. Batchelder says that Citicorp 's `` failure to deliver '' on its promise to raise the UAL bank debt for a labor-management buy-out group `` is very distressing to potential users of a ` highly-confident ' letter from commercial banks . '' 
His client , Mr. Davis , used just such a letter from Citicorp in pursuing UAL ; Citicorp later agreed to work with a competing UAL buy-out group . 
Executives of Citicorp and Chase Manhattan declined to comment on either the UAL situation , or on the changing nature of banks ' role in financing takeovers . 
In the wake of Campeau 's problems , prices of junk bonds tumbled , throwing into doubt the ability of corporate acquirers to finance large takeovers with the help of junk bond sales . 
Mark Solow , senior managing director at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. , says the falloff in junk bonds may yet open new business opportunities to banks in structuring takeovers . 
But he warns that banks will have `` to have enough discipline '' not to make loans that are too risky . 
In fact , Manufacturers Hanover said in its third-quarter earnings report that fees from syndicating loans to other banks dropped 48 % , to $ 21 million . 
`` We did n't take part in a lot of deals because their credit quality was poor , '' says a bank spokesman . 
James B. Lee , head of syndications and private placements at Chemical Banking Corp. , said he believes banks can still make a credible offer of one-stop shopping for takeover finance . 
As evidence , he cites yesterday 's arrangement for the final financing of a $ 3 billion bid for American Medical International Inc. in which Chemical served as both the lead bank and an equity investor . 
Beyond the current weakness in the junk bond market , banks have another advantage over investment banks in financing contested takeovers . 
Arthur Fleischer Jr. , a takeover lawyer at Fried Frank Harris Shriver & Jacobson , notes that `` a political and emotional bias '' has developed against junk bonds . 
One hostile bidder who deliberately avoided using junk bonds was Paramount Communications Inc. in its initial offer to acquire Time Inc. for $ 10.7 billion , or $ 175 a share . 
A Paramount spokesman says that decision was based on the financial , not political , drawbacks of junk bonds . 
But some observers believe Paramount Chairman Martin Davis wanted to avoid the possible taint of being perceived as a corporate raider in his controversial bid for Time . 
In the end , Mr. Davis used junk bonds so that he could raise Paramount 's bid to $ 200 a share . 
Some Monday-morning quarterbacks said the initial lower bid , without junk bonds , was a factor in his losing the company . 
Time eluded Paramount by acquiring Warner Communications Inc . 
The success of the NWA financing , and the failure of the UAL deal , also seem to highlight the important new role in takeover financing being played by Japanese banks . 
Japanese banks accounted for 50 % of the NWA bank debt , according to a report by Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner . 
But it was broad-scale rejection by Japanese banks that helped seal the fate of the attempt to buy UAL . 
Citicorp and Chase are attempting to put together a new , lower bid . 
Takanori Mizuno , chief economist of the Institute for Financial Affairs Inc. , a Tokyo research center on finance and economics , says , `` The junk bond market became very jittery , and there 's a fear of a coming recession and the possible bankruptcy of LBO companies . 
Harley-Davidson Inc. filed suit in federal court here , alleging that a group that holds 6.2 % of its stock made `` false , deceptive and misleading '' statements in recent regulatory filings and public announcements . 
Harley-Davidson 's complaint claims that the group , led by investor Malcolm I. Glazer , violated securities laws by failing to disclose plans to purchase 15 % of the company 's shares outstanding and that when the required Hart-Scott-Rodino filing eventually was made , it did n't disclose the group 's alleged earlier violation of the so-called prior-notice requirements of the law . 
Mr. Glazer could n't immediately be reached to comment . 
But when Harley last week publicly questioned the legality of the group 's filing procedures , the Rochester , N.Y. , investor said `` we complied with every law , '' and he denied any wrongdoing . 
The Glazer group said in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing in early October that it may seek a controlling interest in Harley-Davidson , or seek representation on the company 's board . 
Harley has said it does n't intend to be acquired by the Glazer group or any other party . 
Inland Steel Industries Inc. , battered by lower volume and higher costs , posted a 75 % drop in third-quarter earnings . 
The nation 's fourth-largest steelmaker earned $ 18.3 million , or 43 cents a share , compared with $ 61 million , or $ 1.70 a share , a year earlier , when the industry was enjoying peak demand and strong pricing . 
Sales fell to $ 981.2 million from $ 1.02 billion . 
The earnings also mark a significant drop from the second quarter 's $ 45.3 million or $ 1.25 a share . 
Moreover , the earnings were well below analysts ' expectations of about $ 1.16 a share . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Inland closed yesterday at $ 35.875 a share , down $ 1 . 
The company attributed the earnings drop to lower volume related to seasonal demand and the soft consumer durable market , especially in the automotive sector . 
However , the company also lost orders because of prolonged labor talks in the second quarter . 
Third-quarter shipments slipped 7 % from the year-ago period , and 17 % from this year 's second quarter . 
Profit of steel shipped for the company 's steel segment slid to $ 26 a ton , from $ 66 a ton a year earlier and $ 57 a ton a quarter earlier . 
Analysts noted that the disappointing results do n't reflect lower prices for steel products . 
Charles Bradford , an analyst with Merrill Lynch Capital Markets , said higher prices for galvanized and cold-rolled products offset lower prices for bar , hot-rolled and structural steel . 
Structural steel , which primarily serves the construction market , was especially hurt by a 15 % price drop , Mr. Bradford said . 
The company said its integrated steel sector was also hurt by higher raw material , repair and maintenance , and labor costs . 
The increased labor costs became effective Aug. 1 under terms of the four-year labor agreement with the United Steelworkers union . 
Meanwhile , the company 's service center segment , which saw operating profit drop to $ 11.5 million from $ 30.7 million a year ago , experienced much of the same demand and cost problems , as well as start-up costs associated with a coil processing facility in Chicago and an upgraded computer information system . 
Inland Chairman Frank W. Luerssen said the company 's short-term outlook is `` clouded by uncertainties in the economy and financial markets . '' 
However , he noted that steel mill bookings are up from early summer levels , and that he expects the company to improve its cost performance in the fourth quarter . 
In the first nine months , profit was $ 113 million , or $ 3.04 a share , on sales of $ 3.19 billion , compared with $ 204.5 million , or $ 5.76 a share , on sales of $ 3.03 billion , a year earlier . 
The `` seismic '' activity of a financial market bears a resemblance to the seismic activity of the earth . 
When things are quiet ( low volatility ) , the structures on which markets stand can be relatively inefficient and still perform their functions adequately . 
However , when powerful forces start shaking the market 's structure , the more `` earthquake-resistant '' it is , the better its chance for survival . 
America 's financial markets do not yet have all the required modern features required to make them fully `` aftershock-resistant . '' 
Investors lack equal access to the markets ' trading arena and its information . 
That structural lack is crucial because investors are the only source of market liquidity . 
And liquidity is what markets need to damp quakes and aftershocks . 
In today 's markets , specialists ( on the New York Stock Exchange ) and `` upstairs '' market makers ( in the over-the-counter market ) are the only market participants allowed to play a direct role in the price-determination process . 
When they halt trading , all market liquidity is gone . 
And when any component of the market -- cash , futures or options -- loses liquidity , the price discovery system ( the way prices are determined ) becomes flawed or is lost entirely for a time . 
Last Friday the 13th ( as well as two years ago this week ) the markets became unlinked . 
When that happened , `` seismic '' tremors of fear -- much like the shock waves created by an earthquake -- coursed through the market and increased the market 's volatility . 
Lack of important , needed information can cause fear . 
Fear is the father of panic . 
Panic frequently results in irrational behavior . 
And in financial markets , irrational behavior is sometimes translated into catastrophe . 
When market tremors start , it is crucial that as much information about transaction prices and the supply-demand curve ( buy and sell orders at various prices ) be made available to all , not just to market makers . 
Because of a lack of information and access , many investors -- including the very ones whose buying power could restore stability and damp volatility -- are forced to stand on the sidelines when they are most needed , because of their ignorance of important market information . 
To add aftershock-damping power to America 's markets , a modern , electronic trading system should be implemented that permits equal access to the trading arena ( and the information that would automatically accompany such access ) by investors -- particularly institutional investors . 
Contrary to some opinions , the trading activities of specialists and other market makers do not provide liquidity to the market as a whole . 
What market makers provide is immediacy , a very valuable service . 
Liquidity is not a service . 
It is a market attribute -- the ability to absorb selling orders without causing significant price changes in the absence of news . 
Market makers buy what investors wish to sell ; their business is reselling these unwanted positions as quickly as possible to other investors , and at a profit . 
As a result , while any one customer may purchase immediacy by selling to a market maker ( which is micro-liquidity for the investor ) , the market as a whole remains in the same circumstances it was before the transaction : The unwanted position is still an unwanted position ; only the identity of the seller has changed . 
In fact it can be argued that increasing capital commitments by market makers ( a result of some post-1987 crash studies ) also increases market volatility , since the more securities are held by market makers at any given time , the more selling pressure is overhanging the market . 
In an open electronic system , any investor wishing to pay for real-time access to the trading arena through a registered broker-dealer would be able to see the entire supply-demand curve ( buy and sell orders at each price ) entered by dealers and investors alike , and to enter and execute orders . 
Current quotations would reflect the combined financial judgment of all market participants -- not just those of intermediaries who become extremely risk-averse during times of crisis . 
Investors and professionals alike would compete on the level playing field Congress sought and called a `` national market system '' ( not yet achieved ) almost 15 years ago when it passed the Securities Reform Act of 1975 . 
Last Friday 's market gyrations did not result in severe `` aftershocks . '' 
Were we smart or just lucky ? 
I 'm not certain . 
But I am sure we need to maximize our `` earthquake '' protection by making certain that our market structures let investors add their mighty shock-damping power to our nation 's markets . 
Mr. Peake is chairman of his own consulting company in Englewood , N.J . 
NOW YOU SEE IT , now you do n't . 
The recession , that is . 
The economy 's stutter steps leave investors wondering whether things are slowing down or speeding up . 
So often are government statistics revised that they seem to resemble a spinning weather vane . 
For the past seven years , investors have had the wind at their backs , in the form of a generally growing economy . 
Some may have forgotten -- and some younger ones may never have experienced -- what it 's like to invest during a recession . 
Different tactics are called for , as losing money becomes easier and making money becomes tougher . 
For those investors who believe -- or fear -- that 1990 will be a recession year , many economists and money managers agree on steps that can be taken to lower the risks in a portfolio . 
In a nutshell , pros advise investors who expect a slowdown to hold fewer stocks than usual and to favor shares of big companies in `` defensive '' industries . 
A heavy dose of cash is prescribed , along with a heavier-than-usual allotment to bonds -- preferably government bonds . 
It 's tempting to think these defensive steps can be delayed until a recession is clearly at hand . 
But that may not be possible , because recessions often take investors by surprise . 
`` They always seem to come a bit later than you expect . 
When they do hit , they hit fast , '' says David A. Wyss , chief financial economist at the Data Resources division of McGraw-Hill Inc . 
Though he himself does n't expect a recession soon , Mr. Wyss advises people who do that `` the best thing to be in is long that is , 20-year to 30-year Treasury bonds . '' 
The reason is simple , Mr. Wyss says : `` Interest rates almost always decline during recession . '' 
As surely as a seesaw tilts , falling interest rates force up the price of previously issued bonds . 
They are worth more because they pay higher interest than newly issued bonds do . 
That effect holds true for both short-term and long-term bonds . 
But short-term bonds ca n't rise too much , because everyone knows they will be redeemed at a preset price fairly soon . 
Long-term bonds , with many years left before maturity , swing more widely in price . 
But not just any bonds will do . 
Corporate bonds `` are usually not a good bet in a recession , '' Mr. Wyss says . 
As times get tougher , investors fret about whether companies will have enough money to pay their debts . 
This hurts the price of corporate bonds . 
Also , he notes , `` most corporate bonds are callable . '' 
That means that a corporation , after a specified amount of time has passed , can buy back its bonds by paying investors the face value ( plus , in some cases , a sweetener ) . 
When interest rates have dropped , it makes sense for corporations to do just that ; they then save on interest costs . 
But the investors are left stranded with money to reinvest at a time when interest rates are puny . 
If corporate bonds are bad in recessions , junk bonds are likely to be the worst of all . 
It 's an `` absolute necessity '' to get out of junk bonds when a recession is in the offing , says Avner Arbel , professor of finance at Cornell University . 
`` Such bonds are very sensitive to the downside , and this could be a disaster . '' 
Municipal bonds are generally a bit safer than corporate bonds in a recession , but not as safe as bonds issued by the federal government . 
During an economic slump , local tax revenues often go down , raising the risks associated with at least some municipals . 
And , like corporates , many municipal bonds are callable . 
But a few experts , going against the consensus , do n't think bonds would help investors even if a recession is in the offing . 
One of these is Jeffrey L. Beach , director of research for Underwood Neuhaus & Co. , a brokerage house in Houston , who thinks that `` we 're either in a recession or about to go into one . '' 
What 's more , he thinks this could be a nastier recession than usual : `` Once the downturn comes , it 's going to be very hard to reverse . '' 
Investors , he advises , `` should be cautious , '' holding fewer stocks than usual and also shunning bonds . 
Because he sees a `` 5 % to 6 % base rate of inflation in the economy , '' he doubts that interest rates will fall much any time soon . 
Instead , Mr. Beach says , investors `` probably should be carrying a very high level of cash , '' by which he means such so-called cash equivalents as money-market funds and Treasury bills . 
Greg Confair , president of Sigma Financial Inc. in Allentown , Pa. , also recommends that investors go heavily for cash . 
He is n't sure a recession is coming , but says the other likely alternative -- reignited inflation -- is just as bad . 
`` This late in an expansion , '' the economy tends to veer off either into damaging inflation or into a recession , Mr. Confair says . 
The Federal Reserve Board 's plan for a `` soft landing , '' he says , requires the Fed to navigate `` an ever-narrowing corridor . '' 
A soft landing is n't something that can be achieved once and for all , Mr. Confair adds . 
It has to be engineered over and over again , month after month . 
He believes that the task facing Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan is so difficult that it resembles `` juggling a double-bladed ax and a buzz saw . '' 
And , in a sense , that 's the kind of task individuals face in deciding what to do about stocks -- the mainstay of most serious investors ' portfolios . 
It comes down to a question of whether to try to `` time '' the market . 
For people who can ride out market waves through good times and bad , stocks have been rewarding long-term investments . 
Most studies show that buy-and-hold investors historically have earned an annual return from stocks of 9 % to 10 % , including both dividends and price appreciation . 
That 's well above what bonds or bank certificates have paid . 
Moreover , because no one knows for sure just when a recession is coming , some analysts think investors should n't even worry too much about timing . 
`` Trying to time the economy is a mistake , '' says David Katz , chief investment officer of Value Matrix Management Inc. in New York . 
Mr. Katz notes that some economists have been predicting a recession for at least two years . 
Investors who listened , and lightened up on stocks , `` have just hurt themselves , '' he says . 
Mr. Katz adds that people who jump in and out of the stock market need to be right about 70 % of the time to beat a buy-and-hold strategy . 
Frequent trading runs up high commission costs . 
And the in-and-outer might miss the sudden spurts that account for much of the stock market 's gains over time . 
Still , few investors are able to sit tight when they are convinced a recession is coming . 
After all , in all five recessions since 1960 , stocks declined . 
According to Ned Davis , president of Ned Davis Research Inc. in Nokomis , Fla. , the average drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average was about 21 % , and the decrease began an average of six months before a recession officially started . 
By the time a recession is `` official '' ( two consecutive quarters of declining gross national product ) , much of the damage to stocks has already been done - and , in the typical case , the recession is already half over . 
About six months before a recession ends , stocks typically begin to rise again , as investors anticipate a recovery . 
The average recession lasts about a year . 
Unfortunately , though , recessions vary enough in length so that the average ca n't reliably be used to guide investors in timing stock sales or purchases . 
But whatever their advice about timing , none of these experts recommend jettisoning stocks entirely during a recession . 
For the portion of an investor 's portfolio that stays in stocks , professionals have a number of suggestions . 
Mr. Katz advocates issues with low price-earnings ratios -- that is , low prices in relation to the company 's earnings per share . 
`` Low P-E '' stocks , he says , vastly outperform others `` during a recession or bear market . '' 
In good times , he says , they lag a bit , but overall they provide superior performance . 
Prof. Arbel urges investors to discard stocks in small companies . 
Small-company shares typically fall more than big-company stocks in a recession , he says . 
And in any case , he argues , stocks of small companies are `` almost as overpriced as they were Sept. 30 , 1987 , just before the crash . '' 
For example , Mr. Arbel says , stocks of small companies are selling for about 19 times cash flow . 
( Cash flow , basically earnings plus depreciation , is one common gauge of a company 's financial health . ) 
That ratio is dangerously close to the ratio of 19.7 that prevailed before the 1987 stock-market crash , Mr. Arbel says . 
And it 's way above the ratio ( 7.5 times cash flow ) that bigger companies are selling for . 
Another major trick in making a portfolio recession-resistant is choosing stocks in `` defensive '' industries . 
Food , tobacco , drugs and utilities are the classic examples . 
Recession or not , people still eat , smoke , and take medicine when they 're sick . 
George Putnam III , editor of Turnaround Letter in Boston , offers one final tip for recession-wary investors . 
`` Keep some money available for opportunities , '' he says . 
`` If the recession does hit , there will be some great investment opportunities just when things seem the blackest . '' 
Mr. Dorfman covers investing issues from The Wall Street Journal 's New York bureau . 
Some industry groups consistently weather the storm better than others . 
The following shows the number of times these industries outperformed the Standard & Poor 's 500-Stock Index during the first six months of the past seven recessions . 
Bond prices posted strong gains as investors went on a bargain hunt . 
But while the overall market improved , the new-issue junk-bond market continued to count casualties , even as junk-bond prices rose . 
Yesterday , Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. said it postponed a $ 220 million senior subordinated debenture offering by York International Corp . 
And Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. scrambled to restructure and improve the potential returns on a $ 475 million debenture offering by Chicago & North Western Acquisition Corp. that was still being negotiated late last night . 
The issue by Chicago & North Western is one of the so-called good junk-bond offerings on the new-issue calendar . 
Some analysts said the restructuring of the railroad concern 's issue shows how tough it is for underwriters to sell even the junk bonds of a company considered to be a relatively good credit risk . 
Since last week 's junk-bond market debacle , many new issues of high-yield , high-risk corporate bonds have either been scaled back , delayed or dropped . 
On Wednesday , Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. had to slash the size of Continental Airlines ' junk-bond offering to $ 71 million from $ 150 million . 
Salomon Brothers Inc. has delayed Grand Union Co. 's $ 1.16 billion junk-bond offering while it restructures the transaction . 
Last week , the Grand Union offering was sweetened to include warrants that allow bondholders to acquire common stock . 
Prudential-Bache said the York issue was delayed because of market conditions . 
`` Everything is going through firehoops right now , and { Chicago & North Western } is no exception , '' said Mariel Clemensen , vice president , high-yield research , at Citicorp . 
Portfolio managers say sweeteners like equity kickers and stricter protective covenants may increasingly be required to sell junk-bond deals . 
Dan Baldwin , managing director of high-yield investments at Chancellor Capital Management , said the Chicago & North Western offering was restructured in part because `` several large insurance buyers right now are demanding equity as part of the package . 
If you 're going to take the risk in this market , you want something extra . '' 
Mr. Baldwin likes the offering . 
But several mutual-fund managers , nervous about the deteriorating quality of their junk-bond portfolios and shy about buying new issues , said they 're staying away from any junk security that is n't considered first rate for its class . 
While they consider the Chicago & North Western issue to be good , they do n't view it as the best . 
To lure buyers to the Chicago & North Western bonds , portfolio managers said Donaldson Lufkin sweetened the transaction by offering the bonds with a resettable interest rate and a 10 % equity kicker . 
The bonds are expected to have a 14 1\/2 % coupon rate . 
The equity arrangement apparently would allow bondholders to buy a total of 10 % of the stock of CNW Corp. , Chicago & North Western 's parent company . 
Donaldson Lufkin declined to comment on the restructuring . 
According to some analysts familiar with the negotiations , the 10 % of equity would come directly from Donaldson Lufkin and a fund affiliated with the investment bank Blackstone Group , which would reduce their CNW equity holdings by 5 % each . 
That would leave the Blackstone fund with a 60 % stake and Donaldson Lufkin with 15 % . 
Despite the problems with new issues , high-yield bonds showed gains in the secondary , or resell , market . 
Junk bonds ended about one-half point higher with so-called high-quality issues from RJR Capital Holdings Corp. and Petrolane Gas Service Limited Partnership rising one point . 
In the Treasury market , the benchmark 30-year bond rose seven-eighths point , or $ 8.75 for each $ 1,000 face amount . 
The gain reflects fresh economic evidence that inflation is moderating while the economy slows . 
That raised hopes that interest rates will continue to move lower . 
The Labor Department reported that consumer prices rose just 0.2 % last month , slightly lower than some economists had expected . 
But there were also rumors yesterday that several Japanese institutional investors were shifting their portfolios and buying long-term bonds while selling shorter-term Treasurys . 
Short-term Treasury securities ended narrowly mixed , with two-year notes posting slight declines while three-year notes were slightly higher . 
Yesterday , the Fed executed four-day matched sales , a technical trading operation designed to drain reserves from the banking system . 
The move was interpreted by some economists as a sign that the Fed does n't want the federal funds rate to move any lower than the 8 3\/4 % at which it has been hovering around during the past week . 
The closely watched funds rate is what banks charge each other on overnight loans . 
It is considered an early signal of Fed credit policy changes . 
`` The fact that they did four-day matched sales means they are not in a mood to ease aggressively . 
They are telling us that { 8 3\/4 % } is as low as they want to see the fed funds rate , '' said Robert Chandross at Lloyds Bank PLC . 
Treasury Securities 
The benchmark 30-year bond was quoted late at a price of 101 25\/32 to yield 7.955 % , compared with 100 29\/32 to yield 8.032 % Wednesday . 
The latest 10-year notes were quoted late at 100 9\/32 to yield 7.937 % , compared with 99 26\/32 to yield 8.007 % . 
Short-term rates rose yesterday . 
The discount rate on three-month Treasury bills rose to 7.56 % from 7.51 % Wednesday , while the rate on six-month bills rose to 7.57 % from 7.53 % . 
Meanwhile , the Treasury sold $ 9.75 billion of 52-week bills yesterday . 
The average yield on the bills was 7.35 % , down from 7.61 % at the previous 52-week bill auction Sept. 21 . 
Yesterday 's yield was the lowest since 7.22 % on July 27 . 
Here are details of the auction : 
Rates are determined by the difference between the purchase price and face value . 
Thus , higher bidding narrows the investor 's return while lower bidding widens it . 
The percentage rates are calculated on a 360-day year , while the coupon-equivalent yield is based on a 365-day year . 
Corporate Issues 
Junk bond price climbed yesterday despite skittishness in the new-issue market for high-yield securities . 
Dealers said junk bond issues on average were up by 1\/4 to 1\/2 point with so-called quality issues from RJR Capital Holdings Corp. and Petrolane Gas Service Limited Partnership posting one-point gains . 
Petrolane Gas Service 's 13 1\/4 % debentures traded at 102 , after trading around par earlier this week , and RJR 's 13 1\/2 % subordinated debentures of 2001 were at 101 5\/8 after trading at below par earlier this week . 
Investment-grade bonds were unchanged . 
Municipals 
Activity was brisk in the high-grade general obligation market , as a series of sell lists hit the Street and capped upward price movement in the sector . 
Traders estimated that more than $ 140 million of high-grade bonds was put up for sale via bid-wanted lists circulated by a handful of major brokers . 
There was speculation that the supply was coming from a commercial bank 's portfolios . 
According to market participants , the bonds were met with decent bids , but the volume of paper left high grades in the 10-year and under maturity range unchanged to 0.05 percentage point higher in yield . 
Away from the general obligation sector , activity was modest . 
Long dollar bonds were flat to up 3\/8 point . 
New Jersey Turnpike Authority 's 7.20 % issue of 2018 was up 3\/8 at 98 3\/8 bid to yield about 7.32 % , down 0.03 percentage point . 
The debt of some California issuers pulled off lows reached after Tuesday 's massive earthquake , although traders said market participants remained cautious . 
California expects to rely on federal emergency funds and its $ 1.06 billion in general fund reserves to meet the estimated $ 500 million to $ 1 billion in damages resulting from the quake , according to a state official . 
It 's also unclear precisely how the state will rebuild its reserve , said Cindy Katz , assistant director of California 's department of finance , although she noted that a bond offering for that purpose is n't anticipated . 
Meanwhile , new issuance was slow . 
The largest sale in the competitive arena was a $ 55.7 million issue of school financing bonds from the Virginia Public School Authority . 
A balance of $ 25.8 million remained in late order-taking , according to the lead manager . 
Mortgage-Backed Securities 
Mortgage securities generally ended 6\/32 to 9\/32 point higher , but lagged gains in the Treasury market because of a shift in the shape of the Treasury yield curve and rumored mortgage sales by thrifts . 
Premium Government National Mortgage Association securities with coupon rates of 13 % and higher actually declined amid concerns about increased prepayments because of a plan being considered by Congress to speed the refinancing of government-subsidized mortgages . 
Ginnie Mae 13 % securities were down about 1\/4 at 109 30\/32 . 
If the refinancing plan clears Congress , there could be fairly heavy prepayments on the premium securities , hurting any investor paying much above par for them . 
In the current-coupon sector , a shift in the Treasury yield curve resulting from the better performance of long-dated issues over short-dated securities hurt major coupons because it will become more difficult to structure new derivative securities offerings . 
Ginnie Mae 9 % securities ended at 98 6\/32 , up 9\/32 , and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. 9 % securities were at 97 10\/32 , up 6\/32 . 
The Ginnie Mae 9 % issue was yielding 9.42 % to a 12-year average life assumption , as the spread above the Treasury 10-year note widened 0.03 percentage point to 1.48 . 
While Remic issuance may slow in the coming days because of the shift in the Treasury yield curve , underwriters continued to crank out new real estate mortgage investment conduits structured when the yield curve was more favorable . 
Two new Remics totaling $ 900 million were announced by Freddie Mac yesterday . 
Foreign Bonds 
British government bonds ended little changed as investors awaited an economic policy address last night by Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson . 
The Treasury 11 3\/4 % bond due 2003\/2007 was down 2\/32 at 111 29\/32 to yield 10.09 % , while the 11 3\/4 % notes due 1991 were unchanged at 98 19\/32 to yield 12.94 % . 
In Japan , the bellwether No. 111 4.6 % bond of 1998 ended off 0.03 at 95.72 , to yield 5.32 % , and in West Germany , the 7 % benchmark issue due October 1999 ended 0.05 point lower at 99.85 to yield 7.02 % . 
THE PANHANDLER approaches , makes his pitch . 
It may be straightforward -- he wants money for food -- or incredibly convoluted ; his sister is at this very moment near death in Hoboken , he has lost his wallet and has only $ 1.22 in change to put toward a bus ticket costing $ 3.83 , and wo n't you give him the difference ? 
No ? 
Well , how about a loan , he 'll take your name and address ... 
Figuring that their money would more likely go toward a bottle of Night Train Express , most people have little trouble saying no to propositions like this . 
But healthy skepticism vanishes when they are solicited by an organized charity to help fight cancer , famine , child abuse , or what have you . 
Most see little reason to doubt that their cash will go toward these noble goals . 
But will it ? 
In a distressing number of cases , no . 
In fact , the donors sometimes might be better off giving the money to the panhandler : at least he has no overhead , and he might even be telling the truth . 
Last year , more than $ 100 billion was donated to the nation 's 400,000 charities . 
While the vast bulk of it was indeed spent by reputable organizations on the good works it was raised for , it 's equally true that a sizable hunk was consumed in `` expenses '' claimed by other operators , including fraudulent expenses . 
In many cases the costs claimed were so high that only a dribble of cash was left for the purported beneficiaries . 
It 's impossible to say exactly how much of the total charity intake is devoured by stratospheric fund-raising costs , high-living operators , and downright fraud . 
But the problem clearly is widespread and persistent . 
State law enforcers can barely keep up with charity scams , and reports from watchdog groups such as the Council of Better Business Bureaus are not encouraging . 
The Philanthropic Advisory Service of the BBB reviews hundreds of new charities every year , measuring them against minimum standards for accountability ; for accuracy and honesty in solicitation ; and for percentage of funds actually going to work for which the charity was supposedly established . 
The Service figures at least half of the money taken in should be spent on program . 
Roughly a third of the charities reviewed flunk the test . 
Which , it should be added , does n't prevent the charities from raking in a lot of money anyway . 
Without a microscope and a subpoena , it 's often hard to sort out worthwhile causes from ripoffs if all you 've got to go on is the solicitation itself . 
On this basis , `` there 's no way the average person can know a good charity from a bad one , '' says David Ormstedt , an assistant attorney general in Connecticut . 
`` A lot of donors just get taken . '' 
Including those , he contends , who put about $ 1 million into the kitty for the Connecticut Association of Concerned Veterans and the Vietnam Veterans Service Center . 
The state has sued these charities in state court , complaining that much of the money was grossly misspent ; 82 % , says Mr. Ormstedt , went to fund raisers and most of the rest to the people who ran the charities and to their relatives -- for fur coats , trips to Florida , Lucullan restaurant tabs . 
The telephone number for the charity in Shelton , Conn. , has been disconnected , and the former officials could n't be located . 
Running a charity does cost money , but reputable organizations manage to get the lion 's share of donations out to where they are really needed . 
The Arthritis Foundation , the American Cancer Society and the United Way of America all say that they spend roughly 90 % of their income on programs , not overhead . 
With some other charities , however , it s the other way around . 
The fledgling National Children 's Cancer Society , for example , took in $ 2.5 million last year to finance bone-marrow transplants for children . 
By the time it paid its expenses it only had $ 120,000 left -- not enough to treat even one child . 
The state of Illinois is suing the charity for fraud in Chicago , along with Telesystems Marketing Inc. , its Houston-based fund raiser . 
Both deny wrongdoing . 
The charity admits spending a lot on fund raising , but says that was necessary to establish a donor base it can tap at much lower cost in years to come . 
Michael Burns , president of Telesystems , says his concern has only benefited from the publicity surrounding the case , noting that three other charities have signed on as clients because they were impressed with the amount he raised for National Children 's . 
Meanwhile , a state court judge has allowed the charity to go on soliciting funds . 
Enforcers ca n't put charities out of business simply because they spend the lion 's share of their income on fund raising . 
State laws previously used as a yardstick minimum percentages of income -- usually half -- that had to be spent on the program rather than overhead , but these have been overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court . 
It has ruled that such laws might work to stifle fund raising , which would amount to limiting the charities ' first-amendment right to freedom of expression . 
This puts upon enforcers the burden of proving outright fraud or misrepresentation , and such actions have been brought against hundreds of charities recently . 
The attorney general 's office in Connecticut alone has put seven of them out of business over the past couple of years , and the enforcement drive is continuing there and elsewhere . 
In making cases , the authorities frequently zero in on alleged misrepresentations made by the charities ' fund raisers . 
Illinois , for instance , currently has under investigation 10 of the 30 companies drumming up funds for charities soliciting there . 
Enforcers pay special attention to operators using sweepstakes prizes as an additional inducement to give . 
Attorneys general in several states , including Illinois , are already suing Watson & Hughey Co. , an Alexandria , Va.-based outfit that they say has used deceptive sweepstakes ads to solicit donations for the American Heart Disease Foundation and the Cancer Fund of America . 
According to the Illinois attorney general 's suit , Watson & Hughey sent mailings indicating that recipients were guaranteed cash prizes , and could win up to an additional $ 1,000 on top of them , if they contributed as little as $ 7 . 
But the total value of the prizes was only $ 5,000 and most `` winners '' will receive just 10 cents , according to the attorney general 's office . 
The suit is still pending in Illinois state court . 
Watson & Hughey has denied the allegations in court ; officials decline to comment further . 
While they can target some of the most obvious miscreants , enforcers concede that they are only scratching the surface . 
There are so many cunning ploys used by so many dubious operators , they say , that it is probably impossible to stop them all . 
One maneuver : the `` public education '' gambit . 
The solicitation material indicates that donations will go toward a campaign alerting and informing the public about some health or other issue . 
What it does n't say is that the entire `` campaign '' may be the fund-raising letter itself . 
`` All too often this will merely be a statement on the solicitation such as , ` Do n't smoke ! ' or ` Wear suntan lotion , ' `` says William Webster , attorney general of Missouri . 
`` By putting these pithy statements on the solicitations , hundreds of thousands of dollars are claimed to have been spent on education to consumers when in fact this represents the costs of sending the newsletters . '' 
Mr. Webster cites a four-page mailing from the United Cancer Council that offers a chance to win $ 5,000 in gold bullion to those giving as little as $ 5 to cancer education . 
`` A few boilerplate warnings about cancer appear but that 's only two inches in all four pages . 
I think some people may believe they 're helping fund a massive TV and print campaign , but we could n't find that the charity does anything except write these letters , '' he says . 
Officials at the Washington D.C.-based charity did n't return repeated phone calls . 
Many fly-by-night charities ride the coattails of the biggest , best-known and most reputable ones by adopting names similar to theirs . 
The established charities are bothered by this but say they can do little about it . 
`` We ca n't police the many organizations that have sprung up in the last few years using part of our name . 
Most of them do n't last for long , but in the meantime all we can do is tell people they are n't connected with us , '' says a spokeswoman for the American Heart Association . 
And sometimes a reputable charity with a household name gets used and does n't even know it . 
A couple in Rockford , Ill. , raised $ 12,591 earlier this year using the name and logo of Mothers Against Drunk Driving , without permission from the group . 
MADD did n't learn of the fund raising until the couple sent it a check for $ 613 , along with a letter saying that was the charity 's `` share . '' 
The Illinois Attorney General won a court order to prevent the couple from raising further funds without MADD 's permission . 
The couple could n't be reached for comment and apparently have left Rockford , law enforcement officials report . 
Denise McDonald , a spokeswoman for MADD , says , `` It 's scary , because anybody could do this . '' 
Mr. Johnson is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal 's Chicago bureau . 
Overhead costs at some of the largest charities , in millions of dollars 
British Airways PLC , a crucial participant in the proposed buy-out of UAL Corp. , washed its hands of the current efforts to revive a bid for the parent of United Airlines . 
Specifically , the British carrier said it currently has no plans to participate in any new offer for UAL . 
In addition , British Air officially withdrew its support for the previous $ 300-a-share bid in a terse statement that said `` the original deal is closed . '' 
Company officials said later that British Airways believes its involvement in the UAL buy-out ended last Friday when the buy-out group , which also includes UAL 's management and pilot union , failed to obtain financing for the $ 6.79 billion transaction . 
The carrier stopped short of saying it would n't at some point reconsider participating in any new bid for UAL . 
However , company officials said they plan to take `` no initiatives '' to resurrect the transaction , and `` are n't aware '' of any restructured bid in the making . 
Collectively , the statements raised questions about whether a new bid for UAL will ever get off the ground . 
The transaction has had a series of setbacks since the financing problems became known last Friday , with no signs or statements from the buy-out group to indicate that any progress has taken place . 
However , in response to the British Air decision , United 's pilot union vowed to continue efforts to revive the buy-out . 
Pilot union Chairman Frederick C. Dubinsky said advisers to UAL management and the union will begin meeting in New York today and will work through the weekend to devise a new proposal to present to UAL 's board `` at the earliest time possible . '' 
Pilot union advisers appeared confident that a new bid could go forward even without British Air 's participation . 
UAL declined to comment on British Air 's statement . 
UAL Chairman Stephen M. Wolf , who is leading the management end of the buy-out , has n't provided investors with any assurances about the prospect of a new deal . 
In another setback yesterday , United 's machinist union asked the Treasury Department to investigate whether certain aspects of the original buy-out proposal violated tax laws . 
In an effort to derail the buy-out , the union has already called for investigations by the Securities and Exchange Commission , Transportation Department and Labor Department . 
But there was one bright spot yesterday . 
The United flight-attendants union agreed to negotiations that could lead to the flight attendants contributing concessions to a revived bid in exchange for an ownership stake . 
The pilot union , the only one to support the buy-out thus far , said the flight attendants ' decision `` enforces our belief that an all-employee owned airline is practical and achievable . '' 
Still , without the assurance of British Airways ' financial backing , it will be tougher for the buy-out group to convince already-reluctant banks to make loan commitments for a revised bid , especially since British Air 's original investment represented 78 % of the cash equity contribution for the bid . 
Under the previous plan , British Air would have received a 15 % stake in UAL in exchange for a $ 750 million equity investment , with a 75 % stake going to UAL employees and 10 % to UAL management . 
British Air officials said the airline 's chairman , Lord King , was concerned about news reports indicating that British Air might be willing to participate in a bid that included a lower purchase price and better investment terms for the British carrier . 
The previous reports were based on remarks by British Air 's chief financial officer , Derek Stevens , who said any revised bid would have to include a lower purchase price to reflect the sharp drop in UAL 's stock in the past week . 
UAL stock dropped $ 1.625 yesterday to $ 190.125 on volume of 923,500 shares in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
UAL declined to comment on British Air 's statement . 
In an interview Wednesday with Dow Jones Professional Investor Report , Mr. Stevens said , `` We 're in no way committed to a deal going through at all . 
We 're not rushing into anything . 
We do n't want to be party to a second rejection . '' 
Indeed , British Air seemed to be distancing itself from the troubled transaction early in an effort to avoid any further embarrassment . 
The original transaction fell through on the same day British Air shareholders approved the plan at a special meeting after the British succeeded in arranging the financing for its equity contribution . 
The carrier also seemed eager to place blame on its American counterparts . 
`` The { buy-out } consortium ceased to exist because our American partners were not capable of organizing the financing , '' a British Air spokesman said . 
British Airways may have begun to have second thoughts about the transaction after the Transportation Department forced Northwest 's Airlines ' new owners to restructure the equity contribution of KLM Royal Dutch Airlines in that carrier . 
Most of the department 's statements since the Northwest transaction indicated it planned to curtail foreign ownership stakes in U.S. carriers . 
Even before British Air 's announcement , pilot union leaders had been meeting in Chicago yesterday to consider their options . 
The leaders expressed support for trying to revive the bid following a briefing Wednesday by the union 's advisers , Lazard Freres & Co. and Paul , Weiss , Rifkind Wharton & Garrison . 
They also unanimously re-elected Mr. Dubinsky , the union chairman who has led the pilots ' 2 1 / 2-year fight to take control of the airline . 
UAL 's advisers have indicated previously that it may take a while to come forward with a revised plan since they want to have firm bank commitments before launching a new bid . 
They have maintained that banks remain interested in financing the transaction . 
The buy-out fell through after Citicorp and Chase Manhattan Corp. , the lead banks in the transaction , failed to obtain $ 7.2 billion in financing needed for the plan . 
Italy 's industrial wholesale sales index rose 13.2 % in June from a year earlier , the state statistical institute Istat said . 
The June increase compared with a rise of 10.5 % in May from a year earlier . 
Domestic wholesale sales rose 11.9 % from a year earlier , while foreign sales jumped 17.3 % , Istat said . 
For the first six months , wholesale sales rose 12.3 % from the year before , reflecting to a 11.5 % jump in domestic sales and a 14.6 % boost in foreign sales . 
Sales of capital goods to foreign and domestic destinations increased 16.6 % in the January-June period from a year earlier . 
Sales of consumer goods rose 6.9 % in the same period , while sales of intermediate goods were up 13.8 % from a year ago . 
Senate Democrats favoring a cut in the capital-gains tax have decided , under pressure from their leaders , not to offer their own proposal , placing another obstacle in the path of President Bush 's legislative priority . 
A core group of six or so Democratic senators has been working behind the scenes to develop a proposal to reduce the tax on the gain from the sale of assets . 
The plan was complete except for finishing touches , and there was talk that it would be unveiled as early as yesterday . 
But Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell ( D. , Maine ) , a vigorous opponent of the capital-gains tax cut , called the group to meet with him Wednesday night and again yesterday . 
Sen. Mitchell urged them to desist . 
Afterward , leaders of the dissident Democrats relented , and said they would n't offer their own proposal as they had planned . 
The decision is a setback for President Bush , who needs the support of Democrats to pass the tax cut through the Democratic-controlled Senate . 
Having a proposal sponsored by Democrats would have given the president an advantage . 
Having only a Republican measure makes the task harder . 
Still , Sen. Bob Packwood ( R. , Ore. ) , the lead sponsor of the Republican capital-gains amendment , predicted that the tax cut would be enacted this year . 
He said a clear majority of senators back the tax reduction and that ultimately there would be enough senators to overcome any procedural hurdle the Democratic leadership might erect . 
But Sen. Mitchell , buoyed by his victory among fellow Democrats , strongly disagreed . 
Mr. Mitchell has been predicting that the president 's initiative would fail this year . 
Yesterday , in an interview , he added that the Democrats ' decision `` increases the likelihood that a capital-gains tax cut will not pass this year . '' 
Mr. Mitchell 's first victory came last week , when the Senate passed a deficit-reduction bill that did n't contain a capital-gains provision . 
That vote made it unlikely that a capital-gains tax cut would be included in the final bill , now being drafted by House and Senate negotiators . 
The House version of the bill does include the tax cut . 
Now Republican leaders are concentrating on attaching a capital-gains amendment to some other bill , perhaps a measure raising the federal borrowing limit or a second tax bill that would follow on the heels of the deficit-reduction legislation . 
To help lay the groundwork for that fight , President Bush plans early next week to meet at the White House with some 20 Democratic senators who favor cutting the capital-gains tax or are undecided on the issue . 
The president apparently will have only one bill to push , Sen. Packwood 's , and at least some of the dissident Democrats plan to support it . 
`` I may want to offer additional amendments to improve it when the bill comes to the floor , '' said Sen. David Boren ( D. , Okla. ) , a leader of those Democrats . 
The Packwood plan , as expected , would allow individuals to exclude from income 5 % of the gain from the sale of a capital asset held for more than one year . 
The exclusion would rise five percentage points for each year the asset was held , until it reached a maximum of 35 % after seven years . 
The exclusion would apply to assets sold after Oct. 1 . 
As an alternative , taxpayers could chose to reduce their gains by an inflation index . 
For corporations , the top tax rate on the sale of assets held for more than three years would be cut to 33 % from the current top rate of 34 % . 
That rate would gradually decline to as little as 29 % for corporate assets held for 15 years . 
The Packwood plan also would include a proposal , designed by Sen. William Roth ( R. , Del. ) , that would create new tax benefits for individual retirement accounts . 
The Roth plan would create a new , non-deductible IRA from which money could be withdrawn tax-free not only for retirement , but also for the purchase of a first home , education expenses and medical expenses . 
Current IRAs could be rolled over into the new IRAs , but would be subject to tax though no penalty . 
Westmoreland Coal Co. , realizing benefits of a sustained effort to cut costs and boost productivity , reported sharply improved third-quarter results . 
The producer and marketer of low-sulfur coal said net income for the quarter was $ 5.9 million , or 71 cents a share , on revenue of $ 145.4 million . 
For the year-earlier period , the company reported a loss of $ 520,000 or six cents a share . 
In the latest nine months , the company earned $ 8.5 million , or $ 1.03 a share . 
Last year 's net loss of $ 3,524,000 included a benefit of $ 1,640,000 from an accounting change . 
Revenue for the nine months rose to $ 449 million from $ 441.1 million . 
In an interview , Pemberton Hutchinson , president and chief executive , cited several reasons for the improvement : higher employee productivity and `` good natural conditions '' in the mines , as well as lower costs for materials , administrative overhead and debt interest . 
In the latest nine months , Mr. Hutchinson said , total coal sales rose to about 14.6 million tons from about 14.3 million tons a year earlier . 
In addition , long-term debt has been trimmed to about $ 72 million from $ 96 million since Jan. 1 . 
He predicted the debt ratio will improve further in coming quarters . 
Westmoreland 's strategy is to retain and expand its core business of mining and selling low-sulphur coal in the Appalachia region . 
The operating territory includes coal terminals on the Ohio River and in Newport News , Va . 
Westmoreland exports about a fourth of its coal tonnage , including a significant amount of metallurgical coal produced by others that is used by steelmakers overseas . 
For the past couple of years , Westmoreland has undertaken an aggressive streamlining of all aspects of its business . 
Marginal operations and assets have been sold . 
The size of the company 's board has been reduced to eight directors from 13 . 
About 140 salaried management jobs and hundreds of hourly wage positions have been eliminated . 
Even perks have been reduced . 
For example , the chief executive himself now pays 20 % of the cost of his health benefits ; the company used to pay 100 % . 
`` I think the ship is now righted , the bilges are pumped and we are on course , '' Mr. Hutchinson said of the restructuring program . 
`` Much of what we set out to do is completed . '' 
But he cautioned that Westmoreland 's third quarter is typically better than the fourth , so investors `` should n't just multiply the third quarter by four '' and assume the same rate of improvement can be sustained . 
One difference , he said , is that the fourth quarter has significantly fewer workdays because of holidays and the hunting season . 
`` I do n't want to give the impression that everybody can relax now , '' he said . 
`` We have to keep working at improving our core business to stay efficient . 
It 's a process that never really ends . '' 
Nevertheless , Mr. Hutchinson predicted that 1989 would be `` solidly profitable '' for Westmoreland and that 1990 would bring `` more of the same . '' 
For all of 1988 , the company reported an after-tax operating loss of $ 134,000 on revenue of $ 593.5 million . 
An accounting adjustment made net income $ 1.5 million , or 18 cents a share . 
In a move that complements the company 's basic strategy , its Westmoreland Energy Inc. unit is developing four coal-fired cogeneration plants with a partner in Virginia . 
Some of the coal the plants buy will come from Westmoreland mines . 
Mr. Hutchinson predicted that the unit 's contribution to company results in the 1990s `` will be exciting . '' 
He said Westmoreland is looking at investment stakes in other cogeneration plants east of the Mississippi River . 
Westmoreland expects energy demand to grow annually in the 2.5 % range in the early 1990s . 
`` We see coal 's piece of the action growing , '' Mr. Hutchinson said . 
`` Coal prices , while not skyrocketing , will grow modestly in real terms , we think . 
Chase Manhattan Corp. , after trying unsuccessfully to sell its interest in its lower Manhattan operations building , has exercised its option to purchase the 50-story office tower . 
Chase had purchased an option to buy the building at One New York Plaza for an undisclosed sum from the late Sol Atlas as part of its original lease in 1970 . 
The current transaction cost the bank approximately $ 140 million . 
Of that amount , $ 20 million was payment for the land underneath the building and the rest was for the building itself . 
The building houses about 4,500 Chase workers , most of whom will be moved to downtown Brooklyn after the bank 's new back office center is completed in 1993 . 
The move is part of Chase 's strategy to consolidate its back offices under one roof . 
The headquarters is located a few blocks away at 1 Chase Manhattan Plaza . 
As part of its decision to leave the building , Chase tried to sell its interest , along with the Atlas estate 's interest , shortly after the October 1987 stock market crash . 
Chase Senior Vice President George Scandalios said the bank decided to exercise its option after bids fell short of expectations . 
He said Chase and the Atlas estate were looking to sell the entire building for $ 400 million to $ 475 million , but did n't get an offer for more than $ 375 million . 
As the building 's new owner , Chase will have its work cut out for it . 
Chase is vacating 1.1 million square feet of space , and Salomon Brothers Inc. , whose headquarters is in the building , also plans to move shortly . 
In addition , another major building tenant , Thomson McKinnon Inc. 's Thomson McKinnon Securities , likely will vacate the premises as part of its liquidation . 
New York real estate brokerage Edward S. Gordon Co. will have the difficult task of finding new tenants . 
Even with its striking views of the New York harbor , the building is considered antiquated by modern office standards . 
And Chase will have to spend approximately $ 50 million to remove asbestos from the premises . 
WALL STREET , SHAKE hands with George Orwell . 
The author of the futuristic novel `` 1984 '' invented a language called Newspeak that made it impossible to fully develop a heretical thought -- that is , anything negative about the policies and practices of the state . 
Wall Street has n't gotten that far yet , but it has made a promising start . 
Its language -- call it Streetspeak -- is increasingly mellifluous , reassuring , and designed to make financial products and maneuvers appear better , safer or cheaper than they really are . 
When something undeniably nasty happens , a few euphemisms are deployed to simply make it disappear , much as a fresh grave may be covered by a blanket of flowers . 
For example , we 'll bet you thought that the stock market crashed two years ago . 
Wrong . 
According to some of the grand panjandrums of the market , it never happened . 
In their lexicon the 508-point collapse in the Dow Jones Industrial Average on Oct. 19 , 1987 , was just a big blip . 
Trotting out a much-beloved Streetspeak term , New York Stock Exchange Chairman John Phelan recently declared that history would record the event as only `` a major technical correction . '' 
( Another much-beloved saying , however , this one in plain English , holds that if something walks like a duck and quacks like a duck , it is a duck . 
On Oct. 29 , 1929 -- a date historians stubbornly insist on associating with the dreaded C-word -- the DJ industrials fell 12.8 % . 
In the `` technical correction '' of two years ago , they lost a whopping 22.6 % . ) 
Customers hear a lot of this stuff from people who try to sell them stock . 
These people used to be called brokers , but apparently this word either is not grandiose enough or carries too many negative connotations from the aforementioned technical correction , when terrified customers could n't raise brokers on the phone . 
Either way , the word `` broker '' is clearly out of favor . 
Of the major New York-based securities firms , only Morgan Stanley & Co. still calls its salespeople brokers . 
At Merrill Lynch & Co. and Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. , they are `` financial consultants . '' 
At Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. , Prudential Bache Securities , and Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. , they are `` account executives . '' 
At PaineWebber Inc. , they are `` investment executives . '' 
Such titles are designed to convey a sense of dignified , broad-scale competence and expertise in selling today 's myriad financial products . 
It is a competence and expertise that some brokers themselves , overwhelmed by all the new things being dreamed up for them to peddle , do n't feel . 
`` It s almost product de jour , '' grouses one account executive at Dean Witter . 
The transmogrified brokers never let the C-word cross their lips , instead stressing such terms as `` safe , '' `` insured '' and `` guaranteed '' -- even though these terms may be severely limited in their application to a particular new financial product . 
The names of some of these products do n't suggest the risk involved in buying them , either . 
A case in point : `` government-plus '' bond funds . 
What could imply more safety than investing in government bonds ? 
What could be better than getting a tad more income from them ( the plus ) than other people ? 
Indeed , conservative investors , many of them elderly , have poured more than $ 50 billion into such funds , which promise fatter yields than ordinary Treasury bonds -- only to learn later that these funds use part of their money to dabble in high-risk bond options , a gambler 's game . 
When a certain class of investment performs so poorly that its reputation is tarnished , look for Wall Street to give it a new moniker . 
This seems to be happening now to limited partnerships , many of which either have gone into the tank in recent years or have otherwise been grievous disappointments . 
They are still being sold , but more and more often as `` direct investments '' -- with all the same risks they had under the old label . 
In such cases , the game has n't changed , only the name . 
In others a familiar old name still prevails , but the underlying game has changed . 
For example , `` no load '' mutual funds remain a favorite with investors because they do n't carry a frontend sales commission . 
Getting out of them , however , may be a different story now . 
Traditional no-loads made their money by charging an annual management fee , usually a modest one ; they imposed no other fees , and many still do n't . 
In recent years , though , a passel of others flying the no-load flag have been imposing hefty charges -- all the way up to 6 % -- when an investor sells his shares . 
Should n't they properly be called exit-load funds ? 
The mutual-fund industry is debating the question , but do n't expect a new name while the old one is working so well . 
And do n't expect anyone to change the term `` blue chip , '' either , even though some of the companies that still enjoy the title may be riskier investments than they were . 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. , for one , is still a favorite of widows , orphans and trust departments -- but shorn of its regional telephone units and exposed to competition on every side , it is a far different investment prospect than it was before divestiture . 
Also , blue chips in general have suffered much more short-term price volatility in recent years . 
Larry Biehl , a money manager in San Mateo , Calif. , blames that on the advent of program trading , in which computers used by big institutional investors are programmed to buy and sell big blocks when certain market conditions prevail . 
Blue chips , he says , `` are now being referred to as poker chips . '' 
Finally , even the time-honored strategy called `` value investing '' no longer means what it once did . 
Before the takeover mania of the '80s , it referred to rooting out through analysis undervalued stocks , especially those with shrewd management , sound fundamentals and decent prospects . 
Now , says Mr. Biehl , value investing often means `` looking for downtrodden companies with terrible management that are in real trouble . '' 
To institutional investors or brokers , he adds , a company with value is a company at risk of being swallowed up . 
Ms. Bettner covers personal finance from The Wall Street Journal 's Los Angeles bureau . 
I was amused to read your recent news stories on the banking industry 's reserve additions and concomitant threats to cease making new loans to less-developed countries . 
If the whole story were told , it would read something like this : 
-- During the 1970s the commercial banks lured the country loan business away from the bond markets where the discipline of a prospectus and `` Use of Proceeds '' confirmation allowed lenders to audit expenditures of old loans before new loans were made . 
-- The reward for that reckless lending was high reported earnings ( and management bonuses ) ; the price , a sea of bad loans . 
-- For the past several years , the banks , lacking a private navy to enforce their interests , have been pressuring the U.S. Treasury to underwrite their bad LDC credits . 
-- The Treasury wisely has refused , but has concluded that indirect credit support through various multinational agencies should be made available for a price : either debt reduction or debt-service reduction or new loans ( the Brady Plan ) . 
-- The banks will threaten not to make further loans , but in truth , lacking the capital to write off their mistakes or to build a navy , they have no alternative but to go along . 
George A. Wiegers 
Gillette Co. elected Warren E. Buffett , chairman of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. , to its board , increasing the number of directors to 12 from 11 . 
Berkshire Hathaway earlier this year bought $ 600 million of preferred stock in Gillette that is convertible into an 11 % stake , and Gillette said at the time that Mr. Buffett would be added to the board . 
Separately , Gillette said its third-quarter earnings rose 2 % to $ 65.2 million , or 57 cents a share , from $ 63.9 million , or 57 cents a share , in the year-earlier period ; per-share earnings remained flat despite an increase in net income in part because the company paid a $ 10.4 million dividend on the new preferred stock in the period . 
Sales rose 9 % to $ 921.6 million from $ 845.7 million , with sales of the company 's international / diversified operations `` well above '' the year earlier-period . 
For the nine months , Gillette 's net income declined 1 % to $ 205.3 million , or $ 2.02 a share , from $ 207 million , or $ 1.82 a share , in the 1988 period . 
Sales rose 6 % to $ 2.77 billion from $ 2.61 billion . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , the company closed yesterday at $ 45.50 a share , up 25 cents . 
When Walter Yetnikoff , the president of Sony Corp. 's CBS Records , last month told producer Peter Guber that Sony was about to make a $ 3.4 billion bid for Columbia Pictures and needed someone to run the studio , Mr. Guber jumped at the chance . 
Within two days , he was on his way to New York and Tokyo to meet with top brass at Sony . 
And before the week was out , Sony had offered Mr. Guber and his partner , Jon Peters , the most lucrative employment contracts in the history of the movie business . 
Not only that , Sony also agreed to give them a stake in Columbia 's future profits and buy their company , Guber Peters Entertainment Co. , for $ 200 million , almost 40 % more than the market value of the company . 
There was just one sticking point : The two had a prior commitment . 
Just seven months earlier , they had signed a five-year exclusive contract to make movies for Warner Bros. for which they had just produced the smash hit `` Batman . '' 
But Mr. Guber figured that Warner Communications Inc. chairman Steven Ross , would empathize and let the producers go , knowing the Sony offer was `` the culmination of a life 's work . '' 
He figured wrong . 
Last week , following fruitless settlement talks , Warner , now merging with Time Inc. , filed a $ 1 billion breach of contract suit in Los Angeles Superior Court against both Sony and Guber Peters . 
Sony promptly countersued , charging Warner with trying to sabotage its acquisitions and hurt its efforts to enter the U.S. movie business . 
The accusations of lying and duplicity are flying thick and fast on both sides : As one Sony executive puts it , `` It 's World War III . '' 
That two successful producers who are n't all that well known outside Hollywood could occasion such a clash of corporate titans suggests how desperate the quest for proven talent is in the movie business . 
And they are a very odd team in any case . 
Mr. Guber was raised in Boston and educated in New York . 
He is a lawyer with a string of academic degrees . 
Mr. Peters is a high-school dropout who came to fame as Barbra Streisand 's hairdresser . 
Yet , they are far and away the most prolific producers in Hollywood . 
And despite their share of duds , they make movies that make money . 
That is a skill Sony badly needs -- and Warner is loath to lose . 
Although Columbia had a good summer with `` Ghostbusters II '' and `` When Harry Met Sally , '' rivals such as Warner , Paramount Pictures , Walt Disney Co. and Universal Studios have been thrashing Columbia at the box office . 
After five years of management turmoil , with four different studio heads , Columbia sorely needs a stable , savvy team to restore its credibility and get it back in the business of making hits . 
Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters are n't universally loved in Hollywood but they are well connected . 
Their stock in trade as `` executive producers '' is sniffing out hot properties , locking them up and then getting big studios to bankroll and distribute them . 
Sometimes Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters do little more than grab the first draft of a screenplay for a `` Flashdance , '' or buy rights to a best seller such as `` The Color Purple . '' 
It falls to others to do the writing , directing and producing . 
With MGM / UA 's `` Rainman , '' for instance , Messrs. Guber and Peters had virtually nothing to do with day-to-day production , but their names still appear in big letters on the credits , and they are inevitably associated with its success . 
Sometimes , as with `` Batman , '' the pair really do make the film . 
In that case , Guber Peters acquired the rights in 1979 , nursed the movie through a dozen scripts , and were on the set in London for 11 months hovering over the most minute changes in casting and production . 
`` They 're the best production talent around , '' says Brian De Palma , beholden to Guber Peters for hiring him to direct the Warner movie of Tom Wolfe 's novel `` Bonfire of the Vanities . '' 
On that film , which is to start shooting in a few months , `` they 've been very much involved , hiring talent and discussing the development of the script . 
And when you 're making a movie this big , you need all the help you can get , '' Mr. De Palma adds . 
`` I wish they were around 24 hours a day . '' 
And some movies seem to have been hurt by their inattention . 
Warner executives blame Mr. Guber 's and Mr. Peters 's lack of involvement in `` Caddyshack II '' for casting and production problems and the film 's ultimate dismal failure . 
`` We 've had a few bombs , '' admits Mr. Peters . 
`` But by and large this company has only been profitable . '' 
He says his company 's prowess at packaging and marketing `` is why we 'll be good at Columbia . 
We practically ran our own studio . '' 
Longtime Hollywood associates describe Mr. Guber as the intellectual powerhouse of the two , a man with a flair for deal-making and marketing . 
`` Peter is a major piece of Hollywood manpower who has really earned his success , '' says Robert Bookman , an agent at Creative Artists Agency . 
Mark Johnson , the producer of `` Rainman , '' chimes in : `` He has a great ability to hire terrific people and delegate authority ... . 
It 's no accident that they 've been able to develop such successful material . '' 
Mr. Peters , on the other hand , has fewer fans in Hollywood , and his detractors like to characterize him as something of a hot-tempered bully . 
He gets better reviews as a creative whiz , an enthusiast , an idea man . 
He also had to fight harder for credibility than his partner did . 
Barbra Streisand made him famous . 
He cut her hair . 
He lived with her . 
He came to produce her records and her movies -- `` A Star Is Born '' and `` The Main Event . '' 
Thrice married but now single , Mr. Peters got plenty of ink last summer for an on-set romance with actress Kim Basinger during the making of `` Batman . '' 
Mr. Guber , by contrast , has been married to one woman for more than 20 years . 
But for all their intellectual and stylistic differences , they make the perfect `` good cop , bad cop '' team , Hollywood associates say . 
`` Peter is the bright , sympathetic guy when you 're doing a deal , '' says one agent . 
`` If there 's a problem , Peter disappears , and all of a sudden Jon shows up . '' 
Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters rub many people in Hollywood the wrong way . 
Producers Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer , who shepherded `` Flashdance '' through several scripts and ultimately produced the movie , bristle when Messrs. Guber and Peters take credit for the film . 
Says Mr. Simpson : `` The script was unreadable . 
We reinvented it . 
We are the producers of that movie . 
They got a small piece of the net profits and a screen credit '' as executive producers . 
When Roger Birnbaum , an executive who worked for Guber Peters in the early 1980s , left to take a job as head of production at the United Artists studio , they made him forfeit all credits and financial interest in the films he had helped develop , including `` Rainman '' and `` Batman . '' 
Mr. Peters acknowledges that and says it 's not unlike the situation he and Mr. Guber are in with Warner . 
`` I was upset with Roger , I fumpered and schmumpered , '' says Mr. Peters . 
`` But he wanted to pursue his own dream , and he went . '' 
Still , Mr. Birnbaum says his relationship with Guber Peters was `` one of the most successful I 've had in Hollywood . '' 
The two `` have a wonderful chemistry -- Jon is very impulsive , and Peter is very compulsive , '' adds Mr. Birnbaum , who is now head of production at News Corp. 's 20th Century Fox Film Co . 
`` Jon Peters will come barreling into a room , say he 's got a great idea , and be gone . 
Peter will take the kernel of that idea and make it grow into something specific ... . '' 
Mr. Birnbaum recalls that Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters shifted into high gear a few years back upon learning that they had competition for the story of the murdered naturalist Dian Fossey , which became `` Gorillas in the Mist . '' 
He says , `` Within a few weeks , we made deals with the government of Rwanda and everyone who had ever met or talked to Dian Fossey . 
I think Peter even made some deals with the gorillas . '' 
Universal Studios was working on a competing film , but the studio and its producers ultimately agreed to co-produce the film with Guber Peters and Warner . 
More recently , Guber Peters beat out a dozen other producers , reportedly including Robert Redford and Ted Turner , for rights to the life story of Chico Mendes , the murdered Brazilian union leader who fought developers in the Amazon rain forest . 
Messrs. Guber and Peters assiduously courted the man 's widow for months , showing her a tape of `` Gorillas in the Mist '' to impress her with the quality of their work . 
Money helped , too . 
Ultimately , they paid more than $ 1 million for the rights . 
( The sale caused a rift between the widow and some of her husband 's followers . 
Some of the money will go to the Chico Mendes Foundation , but it is n't earmarked for groups trying to save the rain forest . ) 
It 's hardly astonishing ( given the men 's track record ) that Sony wants Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters . 
But it is puzzling to some Hollywood executives that Sony rushed to hire them without clearing up the Warner situation first . 
Some note that Sony might have saved itself some trouble by just hiring Mr. Guber and letting Mr. Peters stay on to fulfill the Warner contract . 
But though `` people in town may ask why Guber needs Peters , it 's good to have a partner , and obviously the chemistry works , '' says Steven Tisch , a producer who once worked for Mr. Guber . 
`` This business is n't about personalities at the end of the day -- it s about whether the ink is red or black . 
In the case of Peter and Jon , the ink has been very , very black . '' 
Mr. Guber got his start in the movie business at Columbia two decades ago . 
Recruited from New York University 's MBA program , he rose within two years to head of production , overseeing such films as `` The Way We Were , '' `` Taxi Driver , '' `` Tommy '' and `` Shampoo . '' 
In 1976 , he teamed up with record producer Neil Bogart in Casablanca Records and Filmworks -- later called Polygram Pictures -- where they produced such hits as as `` The Deep , '' and `` Midnight Express . '' 
In 1980 , Mr. Guber got together with Mr. Peters , by then a successful producer in his own right , after the death of Mr. Bogart . 
While Guber Peters produced a number of hits for Warner and others , their record was n't always so impressive . 
Among their clinkers were `` The Legend of Billie Jean , '' `` VisionQuest , '' `` Clue '' and `` Clan of the Cave Bear . '' 
And the failures make it possible for Warner in its current lawsuit to paint the producers as ingrates . 
The studio says it stuck with them `` even in the early years when the creative partnership was not particularly profitable for Warner . '' 
Mr. Guber replies that `` this is a Goliath , this Time Warner , trying to chew up two fellows who have done only well for them for a long period of time . '' 
Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters maintain that executives at Warner have always known of their ambitions to run a major entertainment powerhouse , but that Warner never felt threatened until they linked up with Sony . 
`` From the beginning , { they } knew we had a goal and a dream , '' says Mr. Guber . 
On a number of occasions , he adds , he tried to get Warner to buy Guber Peters outright . 
`` They always listened , but they never acted , '' Mr. Guber says . 
In 1987 , Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters contributed their company 's assets in exchange for a 28 % stake in Barris Entertainment , a small-fry TV production company controlled by Giant Industries Inc. Chairman Burt Sugarman . 
In July a year later , Warner agreed to release the producers from their old contract when Messrs. Guber , Peters and Sugarman made a $ 100 million offer to buy 25 % of MGM / UA . 
Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters planned to run the nearly dormant MGM studio , and the two even tried to interest Warner Bros . ' President Terry Semel in becoming a partner after he advised them on the deal . 
But the MGM plan collapsed just two weeks later . 
Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters say they got a look at the books and balked at the price . 
Their relationship with Mr. Sugarman soured shortly thereafter . 
Last May , he sold his 24 % stake in Barris to a passive Australian investor and Barris was renamed Guber Peters Entertainment Co . 
Meanwhile , Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters had agreed to extend their Warner agreement with the new five-year exclusive contract . 
The new deal was considered the most generous of its kind , both financially and in terms of creative freedom . 
But it paled by comparison to what Sony was to offer last month : the chance , at last , to run a major studio , about $ 50 million in deferred compensation , up to 10 % of Columbia 's future cash flow , 8 % of the future appreciation of Columbia 's market value , and annual salaries of $ 2.7 million for each . 
The producers ' 28 % share of publicly held Guber Peters would net them an additional $ 50 million . 
Sony also agreed to indemnify the producers against any liability to Warner . 
Sony is paying a hefty price for a company that had revenue of only $ 42 million last year . 
And earnings have been erratic . 
In the the latest quarter , thanks in part to `` Batman , '' Guber Peters earned $ 5.8 million , or 50 cents a share , compared to a loss of $ 6.8 million , or 62 cents a share , in last year 's quarter . 
Guber Peters stock , which traded as low as $ 6 a share last year , closed yesterday at $ 16.625 . 
The two sides now are accusing each other of lying . 
Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters claim they have an oral agreement with Warner executives that allows them to terminate their contract should the opportunity to run a major studio arise . 
But in affidavits filed yesterday in the Los Angeles court , Mr. Ross , Warner Bros. Chairman Robert Daly and President Semel deny that such an oral agreement was ever made . 
Warner , in its court filings , calls it `` a piece of fiction created for this litigation . '' 
Mr. Daly in his affidavit acknowledges that Warner agreed to release the producers last year to take over MGM but says that situation was altogether different . 
For one thing , according to Mr. Daly , the producers requested a release in advance . 
Moreover , the old contract was about to expire , and the lineup of Guber Peters pictures for Warner was n't as strong as it is now . 
Warner itself was in negotiations with MGM over certain movie and other rights , and it was `` in Warner 's interest to accommodate MGM / UA , Guber and Peters by permitting them to become MGM executives , '' Mr. Daly said in his affidavit . 
Warner obviously does n't think that it is in its own interests to let Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters go off to Columbia . 
At the very least , Mr. Ross clearly sees an opportunity to use the two men to get a pound of flesh from Sony . 
During settlement talks , for example , Warner demanded such things as cable TV rights to Columbia movies and Columbia 's interest in the studio it jointly owns with Warner , according to executives involved in the talks . 
In any settlement , Warner is almost certain to demand rights to most of the 50 or so projects Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters have locked up for the next few years , notably sequels to `` Batman . '' 
Mr. Guber and Mr. Peters refuse to concede that they may have made a tactical error in accepting the Sony offer before taking it up with Warner . 
And they say there are plenty of precedents in Hollywood for letting people out of contracts . 
The last time Columbia Pictures was looking for a studio chief , they note , Warner released producer David Puttnam from his contract , then took him back after he was subsequently fired by his bosses at Columbia . 
In his affidavit filed yesterday , Warner 's Mr. Ross indicated he is n't buying any such argument : `` If Sony succeeds here , no written contract in Hollywood will be worth the paper it 's written on . 
THE SALES PITCH could n't sound better . 
First , there 's the name : `` asset-backed securities . '' 
Better than all those offers you get to buy securities backed by nothing . 
And there 's more . 
The assets backing the securities come from some of the country 's biggest -- and most secure -- institutions . 
Most earn high ratings from credit agencies . 
Their yields are higher than those of U.S. Treasury issues . 
And the booming market has already attracted many of the nation 's biggest institutional investors . 
Ready to jump ? 
Well , think twice . 
The concept may be simple : Take a bunch of loans , tie them up in one neat package , and sell pieces of the package to investors . 
But the simplicity may be misleading . 
Skeptics say the slightly higher returns are n't enough to compensate for the extra risk . 
They warn that asset-backed securities are only as good as the assets and credit backing that support them -- and those are hard to evaluate . 
Moreover , the securities were introduced only about 4 1\/2 years ago ; the biggest unknown is how they will fare in a recession . 
`` A lot of this stuff really is in untested waters , '' says Owen Carney , director of the investment securities division of the U.S. comptroller of the currency . 
`` We do n't know how this whole market will work in a serious economic downturn . '' 
Such concerns , however , have n't stopped asset-backed securities from becoming one of Wall Street 's hottest new products . 
Since the spring of 1985 , financial alchemists have transformed a wide variety of debt into these new securities . 
They have sold issues backed by car loans , boat loans and recreational-vehicle loans . 
They have offered bundles of homeequity loans , as well as packages of loans used to buy vacation time-shares . 
Last year , there was an issue of `` death-backed bonds '' -- securities backed by loans to life-insurance policyholders . 
Some predict there will be `` Third World bonds , '' backed by loans to Brazil , Argentina and other debt-ridden nations . 
And the biggest volume this year has been on securities backed by credit-card receivables , sometimes known as `` plastic bonds . '' 
`` This is the heyday of debt , '' says James Grant , editor of Grant 's Interest Rate Observer , a newsletter . 
`` Before the sun sets on the '80s , it seems nothing will be left unhocked . '' 
The result is a $ 45 billion market , according to Securities Data Co . 
That includes more than $ 9.5 billion issued through August of this year , up sharply from $ 6.5 billion in the comparable 1988 period -- and more than in all of 1987 . 
Most issues have been sold to professional money managers , pension funds , bank trust departments and other institutions . 
But wealthy individuals also have been jumping in , and lately brokers have been pushing smaller investors into the asset-backed market . 
The entry fee is affordable : Issues typically are sold in minimum denominations of $ 1,000 . 
`` We expect additional offerings '' of asset-backed securities targeted toward individual investors , says Bill Addiss , a senior vice president at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc . 
The process typically begins when an institution , such as Citibank or Sears , Roebuck & Co. , takes a pool of credit-card or other receivables and sells them to a specially created trust . 
The trust then issues securities -- generally due in five years or less -- that are underwritten by Wall Street brokerage firms and offered to investors . 
Issues typically come with `` credit enhancements , '' such as a bank letter of credit , and thus have received high credit ratings . 
Enthusiasts say the booming market has opened up a valuable new source of funds to issuers , while providing a valuable new investment for individuals and institutions . 
Asset-backed securities `` are an attractive investment compared to bank certificates of deposit or other corporate bonds , '' says Craig J. Goldberg , managing director and head of the asset-backed securities group at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets . 
But skeptics question whether asset-backed bonds offer sufficient rewards to compensate for the extra risks . 
Consider a $ 500 million offering of 9 % securities issued last spring and backed by Citibank credit-card receivables . 
The triple-A-rated issue offered a yield of only about 0.5 percentage point above four-year Treasury issues . 
On a $ 10,000 investment , that 's a difference of only $ 50 a year . 
That kind of spread can be critical for money managers who buy bonds in large quantities and whose livelihood depends on outperforming the money manager across the street . 
But for individuals who buy much smaller amounts and care less about relative performance than in preserving what they have , that margin is meaningless . 
`` If you 're in the bond business playing the relative-performance derby , then even an extra 25 basis points ( 0.25 percentage point ) becomes an important consideration on a career basis , '' says Mr. Grant . 
`` But if you 're an individual investing money and trying to get it back again , then that is n't of overwhelming importance . '' 
Moreover , the interest on asset-backed securities is fully taxable , while interest on Treasury issues is tax-free at the state and local level . 
That 's why some investment managers , such as Alex Powers , a vice president of Chase Manhattan Bank 's private banking division , do n't recommend most asset-backed issues for individuals in high-tax states , such as New York or California . 
But Mr. Powers has purchased asset-backed issues for individuals with tax-deferred accounts , such as retirement plans . 
He points out that institutions buying asset-backed issues in large quantities can earn higher spreads over Treasurys than individuals buying smaller amounts . 
Another concern is liquidity , or how easily a security can be converted into cash . 
The secondary , or resale , market for asset-backed securities is relatively new and much less active than for Treasury issues . 
That could make it tricky for investors who need to sell their holdings quickly before the securities mature . 
That 's particularly true , analysts say , for certain of the securities , such as those backed by time-share loans . 
`` You could see massive gyrations here because it 's such a thinly traded market , '' says Jonathan S. Paris , a vice president of European Investors Inc. , a New York investment-management firm . 
In addition , an investor who wants to know the daily value of Treasury bonds , or corporate bonds traded on the New York Stock Exchange , can simply check newspaper listings . 
There are n't any such listings for asset-backed securities . 
Evaluating asset-backed securities poses another problem . 
Investors , for instance , may mistakenly assume that the bank or company that originally held the assets is guaranteeing the securities . 
It is n't . 
The front cover of the prospectus for the Citibank credit-card receivables offering points out in bold capital letters that the certificates represent an interest only in the specially created trust and `` do not represent interests in or obligations of the banks , Citibank N.A. , Citicorp or any affiliate thereof . '' 
In other words , if there 's a problem , do n't expect Citibank to come to the rescue . 
The prospectus also notes that the securities are not guaranteed by any government agency . 
That means investors have to focus on the quality of the debt that lies beneath the securities , as well as on the credit enhancement for the issue and the credit ratings the issue has received . 
That also is n't easy . 
Take the `` credit enhancements , '' which typically include a bank letter of credit or insurance from a bond-insurance company . 
The letter of credit typically is not offered by the bank selling the assets to back the securities . 
Nor does it cover the entire portfolio . 
Details of credit enhancements vary widely from issue to issue . 
Still , they play a crucial role in winning top ratings for most asset-backed issues -- which in turn is why the yield above Treasurys is so slim . 
But skeptics ask why you should bother buying this stuff when you can get only slightly lower yields on government-guaranteed paper . 
When you buy an asset-backed issue , you take the risk that a bank or an insurer could run into unexpected difficulties . 
If a bank 's credit rating was lowered because of , say , its loans to Third World nations , that could also affect the ratings , liquidity and prices of the asset-backed issues that the bank supports . 
Underwriters insist these issues are constructed to withstand extremely tough economic conditions . 
But despite the credit enhancements , despite the high ratings , some money managers still worry that a recession could wreak havoc on the underlying assets . 
At a time when Americans are leveraged to their eyeballs , asset-backed investors may be taking a heady gamble that consumers will be able to repay loans in hard times . 
At the very least , a recession would prompt investors to buy the highest-quality bonds they can find -- that is , Treasurys . 
That could widen the yield spread between Treasurys and asset-backed securities , as well as make it tougher to unload the latter . 
But it could be much worse . 
Some analysts are especially wary of credit-card issues . 
For one thing , credit-card loans are unsecured . 
In addition , they fear that banks have been overeager to issue cards to the public -- giving cards to too many big spenders who will default during a recession . 
`` A day of reckoning is coming where we think the market will place a high premium on the highest-quality debt issues , and therefore we think the best debt investment is U.S. government bonds , '' says Craig Corcoran of Davis / Zweig Futures Inc. , an investment advisory firm . 
What about triple-A-rated asset-backed issues ? 
`` Nope , we still say to stick with Treasurys , '' Mr. Corcoran replies . 
Ratings , he notes , `` are subject to change . '' 
All this makes asset-backed securities seem too risky for many people . 
And it reminds Raymond F. DeVoe Jr. , a market strategist at Legg Mason Wood Walker Inc. , of what he calls `` DeVoe 's Unprovable but Highly Probable Theory No. 1 : 
`` More money has been lost reaching for yield than in all the stock speculations , scams and frauds of all time . '' 
Mr. Herman is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal 's New York bureau . 
Volume of asset-backed securities issued annually 
\* Principal amount 
\*\* As of August 30 
\* Principal amount 
Source : Securities Data Co . 
IF YOU FORCE financial planners to sum up their most important advice in a single sentence , it would probably be a one-word sentence : Diversify . 
Judging by a poll of Wall Street Journal readers conducted this summer by Erdos & Morgan Inc. , serious investors have taken that advice to heart . 
Nearly 1,000 investors responded to the Journal 's poll , providing an in-depth look at their portfolios . 
Those portfolios are remarkably diversified . 
By spreading their wealth among several investment alternatives , the respondents have protected themselves against squalls in any one area , be it stocks , bonds or real estate . 
For example , about 88 % of Journal readers owned stock ( down slightly from 91 % in a similar poll last year ) . 
But only 17.5 % said they had more than half their money in the stock market . 
Similarly , 57 % of respondents own shares in a money-market mutual fund , and 33 % own municipal bonds . 
But only 6 % to 7 % of the investors were committing more than half their funds to either of those alternatives . 
The poll , conducted Aug. 7-28 , also provides a glimpse into the thinking of serious investors on a variety of other topics . 
It found them in a cautious , but not downbeat , mood . 
Of 1,500 people sent a questionnaire , 951 replied . 
The response rate , more than 63 % , allows the results to be interpreted with a high degree of confidence . 
The results ca n't be extrapolated to all investors , though . 
Journal readers are relatively affluent , with a median household income of between $ 75,000 and $ 99,000 . 
Nearly half of the respondents ( 47 % ) said their investment portfolio was worth $ 250,000 or more , and 17 % said it was worth $ 1 million or more . 
The respondents were mildly optimistic about the economy and investment markets , but their collective judgments were a notch more sober than they were a year ago . 
For example , 12 % of this year 's respondents said they expect a recession within 12 months . 
Last year , only 8 % were expecting a recession . 
An additional 56 % of this year 's respondents expect the economy to slow down during the next 12 months . 
Only 42 % of last year 's respondents anticipated slowing growth . 
Apparently , the respondents do n't think that an economic slowdown would harm the major investment markets very much . 
A slim majority ( 51 % ) think stock prices will be higher in August 1990 than they were in August 1989 . 
Their verdict on real estate is almost the same . 
Some 50 % expect real estate in their local area to increase in value over the next 12 months . 
By contrast , only 32 % expect an increase in the price of gold . 
Since gold tends to soar when inflation is high , that finding suggests that people believe inflation remains under control . 
Even though only 12 % actually predicted a recession , many respondents were taking a better-safe-than sorry investment stance . 
Nearly a third said they have made some portfolio changes to anticipate a possible recession . 
For the most part , the changes were `` slight . '' 
The two-thirds who have n't tried to make their portfolios more recession-resistant were split about evenly between investors who `` do n't believe in trying to predict the markets '' ( about 31 % ) and investors who `` do n't expect a recession '' ( about 15 % ) or are `` unsure if and when a recession might come '' ( about 22 % ) . 
A buy-and-hold approach to stocks continues to be the rule among respondents . 
Most own two to 10 stocks , and buy or sell no more than three times a year . 
Some 71 % had bought some stock in the past year ; only 57 % had sold any . 
But the lurking shadow of 1987 's stock-market crash still seems dark . 
About 33 % considered another crash `` likely , '' while about 63 % said one is `` unlikely . '' 
Those percentages hardly changed from the previous year 's poll . 
And the respondents ' commitment to the stock market remains somewhat lighter than usual . 
About 60 % of them said they would `` ordinarily '' have at least 25 % of their money in stocks . 
But as of August , only 50 % actually had stock-market investments of that size . 
Most stock-market indexes were hitting all-time highs at around the time of the poll . 
But it appears that many Journal readers were taking that news as a sign to be cautious , rather than a signal to jump on the bandwagon . 
Mr. Dorfman covers investing issues from The Wall Street Journal 's New York bureau . 
Canadian steel ingot production totaled 276,334 metric tons in the week ended Oct. 14 , down 5.3 % from the preceding week 's total of 291,890 tons , Statistics Canada , a federal agency , said . 
The week 's total was down 7.1 % from 297,446 tons a year earlier . 
A metric ton is equal to 2,204.62 pounds . 
The cumulative total in 1989 was 12,283,217 tons , up 7.5 % from 11,429,243 tons a year earlier . 
Health Care Property Investors Inc. said it acquired three long-term care facilities and one assisted-living facility in a purchase-and-lease transaction valued at $ 15 million . 
The real estate investment trust said that it leased the three Florida facilities to National Health Care Affiliates Inc. of Buffalo , N.Y . 
Health Care Property holds an interest in 139 facilities in 30 states . 
Moody 's Investors Service said it lowered its rating on about $ 75 million of this Chatsworth , Calif. , concern 's convertible subordinated debentures , due 2012 , to Caa from B2 . 
It said the reduction reflects impaired business prospects and reduced financial flexibility caused by continuing losses at the maker of Winchester disk drives . 
VALLEY National Corp. -- 
Moody 's Investors Service Inc. said it lowered its rating on about $ 400 million of this bank holding company 's senior debt to B2 from Ba3 . 
Moody 's said it expects Valley National , of Phoenix , Ariz. , to make substantial further provisions against its real-estate portfolio , and that it continues to suffer from the high cost of carrying nonperforming assets , and from high loan-loss provisions . 
Electronic theft by foreign and industrial spies and disgruntled employees is costing U.S. companies billions and eroding their international competitive advantage . 
That was the message delivered by government and private security experts at an all-day conference on corporate electronic espionage . 
`` Hostile and even friendly nations routinely steal information from U.S. companies and share it with their own companies , '' said Noel D. Matchett , a former staffer at the federal National Security Agency and now president of Information Security Inc. , Silver Spring , Md . 
It `` may well be '' that theft of business data is `` as serious a strategic threat to national security '' as it is a threat to the survival of victimized U.S. firms , said Michelle Van Cleave , the White House 's assistant director for National Security Affairs . 
The conference was jointly sponsored by the New York Institute of Technology School of Management and the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics Association , a joint industry-government trade group . 
Any secret can be pirated , the experts said , if it is transmitted over the air . 
Even rank amateurs can do it if they spend a few thousand dollars for a commercially available microwave receiver with amplifier and a VCR recorder . 
They need only position themselves near a company 's satellite dish and wait . 
`` You can have a dozen competitors stealing your secrets at the same time , '' Mr. Matchett said , adding : `` It 's a pretty good bet they wo n't get caught . '' 
The only way to catch an electronic thief , he said , is to set him up with erroneous information . 
Even though electronic espionage may cost U.S. firms billions of dollars a year , most are n't yet taking precautions , the experts said . 
By contrast , European firms will spend $ 150 million this year on electronic security , and are expected to spend $ 1 billion by 1992 . 
Already many foreign firms , especially banks , have their own cryptographers , conference speakers reported . 
Still , encrypting corporate communications is only a partial remedy . 
One expert , whose job is so politically sensitive that he spoke on condition that he would n't be named or quoted , said the expected influx of East European refugees over the next few years will greatly increase the chances of computer-maintenance workers , for example , doubling as foreign spies . 
Moreover , he said , technology now exists for stealing corporate secrets after they 've been `` erased '' from a computer 's memory . 
He said that Oliver North of Iran-Contra notoriety thought he had erased his computer but that the information was later retrieved for congressional committees to read . 
No personal computer , not even the one on a chief executive 's desk , is safe , this speaker noted . 
W. Mark Goode , president of Micronyx Inc. , a Richardson , Texas , firm that makes computer-security products , provided a new definition for Mikhail Gorbachev 's campaign for greater openness , known commonly as glasnost . 
Under Mr. Gorbachev , Mr. Goode said , the Soviets are openly stealing Western corporate communications . 
He cited the case of a Swiss oil trader who recently put out bids via telex for an oil tanker to pick up a cargo of crude in the Middle East . 
Among the responses the Swiss trader got was one from the Soviet national shipping company , which had n't been invited to submit a bid . 
The Soviets ' eavesdropping paid off , however , because they got the contract . 
The University of Toronto stepped deeper into the contest for Connaught BioSciences Inc. by reaching an unusual agreement with Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Chiron Corp . 
The University said the two companies agreed to spend 25 million Canadian dollars ( $ 21.3 million ) over 10 years on research at Canadian universities if they are successful in acquiring the vaccine maker . 
It said $ 10 million would go to the University of Toronto . 
Ciba-Geigy and Chiron have made a joint bid of C$ 866 million for Connaught , and Institut Merieux S.A. of France has made a rival bid of C$ 942 million . 
The University is seeking an injunction against the Merieux bid , arguing that Connaught 's predecessor company agreed in 1972 that Connaught 's ownership would n't be transferred to foreigners . 
The university implied that it would drop its opposition to foreign ownership if Ciba-Geigy and Chiron are successful with their lower bid . 
It said the new agreement would `` replace '' the old one that forms the basis of its suit against the Merieux takeover . 
`` Notwithstanding foreign ownership of Connaught , this accord would enhance research and development in Canada , '' said James Keffer , the university 's vice president of research . 
Ciba-Geigy is a Swiss pharmaceutical company and Chiron is based in Emeryville , Calif . 
In a statement , Jacques-Francois Martin , director general of Merieux , said the French company is still determined to acquire Connaught . 
While he did n't comment directly on the pact between Ciba-Geigy and the university , he said Merieux can transfer new products and technologies to Connaught more rapidly than other companies `` not currently producing and marketing vaccines { who } can only promise this for some ... years in the future . '' 
In national over-the-counter trading yesterday , Connaught closed at $ 28.625 , up $ 1.25 . 
Microsoft and other software stocks surged , leading the Nasdaq composite index of over-the-counter stocks to its biggest advance of the year on breathtaking volume . 
Leading the pack , Microsoft soared 3 3\/4 , or 4 % , to a record price of 84 1\/4 on 1.2 million shares . 
On the other hand , Valley National tumbled 24 % after reporting a sizable third-quarter loss . 
The Nasdaq composite leaped 7.52 points , or 1.6 % , to 470.80 . 
Its largest previous rise this year came Aug. 7 , when it gained 4.31 . 
The OTC market 's largest stocks soared as well , as the Nasdaq 100 Index jumped 10.01 , or 2 % , to 463.06 . 
The Nasdaq Financial Index rose 5.04 , or 1.1 % , to 460.33 . 
By comparison , the Dow Jones Industrials and the New York Stock Exchange Composite each rose 1.5 % . 
Volume totaled 173.5 million shares , 30 % above this year 's average daily turnover on Nasdaq . 
Among broader Nasdaq industry groups , the utility index gained 18.11 to 761.38 . 
The transportation and insurance sectors each posted gains of 8.59 , with the transports finishing at 486.74 and the insurers at 537.91 . 
The Nasdaq industrial index climbed 8.17 to 458.52 , and the `` other finance '' index , made up of commercial banks and real estate and brokerage firms , rose 3.97 to 545.96 . 
The index of smaller banks improved 1.97 . 
Of the 4,346 issues that changed hands , 1,435 rose and 629 fell . 
Jeremiah Mullins , head of OTC trading at Dean Witter Reynolds , said both institutional and retail investors were buying . 
But there was a dearth of sellers , traders said , so buyers had to bid prices up to entice them . 
`` There 's no pressure on OTC stocks at this point , '' said Mr. Mullins , who said some buyers are beginning to shop among smaller OTC issues . 
Microsoft 's surge followed a report this week of substantially improved earnings for its first quarter , ended Sept. 30 . 
The stock was trading at 69 just two weeks ago . 
Rick Sherlund , a Goldman Sachs analyst , has raised his earnings estimates for the company twice in the past two weeks , citing improved margins . 
After the earnings were announced , he raised his fiscal 1990 estimate to between $ 3.80 and $ 4 a share . 
Microsoft earned $ 3.03 a share in fiscal 1989 . 
Among other software issues , Autodesk jumped 1 1\/4 to 42 , Lotus Development was unchanged at 32 1\/2 , Novell jumped 7\/8 to 30 3\/4 , Ashton-Tate gained 1\/4 to 10 5\/8 , and Oracle Systems rose 3\/4 to 25 3\/4 . 
Caere , a new software issue , surged from its offering price of 12 to close at 16 1\/8 . 
The company also makes optical character recognition equipment . 
Caere was underwritten by Alex . Brown & Sons . 
Another recently offered Alex . Brown issue , Rally 's , surged 3 1\/8 to 23 . 
The operator of fast-food restaurants , whose shares began trading last Friday , climbed 3 1\/8 to 23 on 944,000 shares . 
Its 1.7 million-share offering was priced at 15 . 
Valley National 's slide of 5 3\/4 points to 18 1\/2 on 4.2 million shares followed its report late Wednesday of a $ 72.2 million third-quarter loss . 
In the 1988 quarter , the Phoenix , Ariz. , commercial banking concern earned $ 18.7 million . 
Valley National said its $ 110 million provision for credit losses and $ 11 million provision for other real estate owned is related to weakness in the Arizona real estate market . 
Additionally , Moody 's Investors Service said it downgraded Valley National 's senior debt and confirmed the company 's commercial paper rating of `` not prime . '' 
A new issue , Exabyte , surged 2 1\/8 from its initial offering price to close at 12 1\/8 . 
The offering was for about 2.8 million shares of the data storage equipment maker ; more than 2.2 million shares changed hands after trading began . 
Dell Computer dropped 7\/8 to 6 . 
The company said earnings for the year ending Jan. 28 , 1990 , are expected to be 25 to 35 cents a share , compared with a previous estimate of 50 to 60 cents a share . 
Nutmeg Industries lost 1 3\/4 to 14 . 
Raymond James & Associates in St. Petersburg , Fla. , lowered its third-quarter earnings estimate for the company , according to Dow Jones Professional Investor Report . 
A.P. Green Industries advanced 1 5\/8 to 36 1\/8 . 
East Rock Partners , which has indicated it might make a bid for the company , said A.P. Green , a refractory products maker , told the partnership it is n't for sale . 
Row 21 of Section 9 of the Upper Reserved at Candlestick Park is a lofty perch , only a few steps from the very top of the stands . 
From my orange seat , I looked over the first-base line and the new-mown ball field in the warm sun of the last few minutes before what was to have been the third game of the World Series . 
It was five in the afternoon , but that was Pacific time . 
Back in New York the work day was already over , so I did n't have to feel guilty . 
Even still , I did feel self-indulgent , and I could n't help remembering my father 's contempt for a rich medical colleague who would go to watch the Tigers on summer afternoons . 
This ballpark , the Stick , was not a classic baseball stadium -- too symmetrical , too much bald concrete . 
And it did n't have the crowded wild intimacy of Yankee Stadium . 
But I liked the easy friendliness of the people around me , liked it that they 'd brought their children , found it charming that , true citizens of the state of the future , they had brought so many TVs and radios to stay in touch with electroreality at a live event . 
Maybe it was their peculiar sense of history . 
The broadcasters were , after all , documenting the game , ratifying its occurrence for millions outside the Stick . 
Why not watch or hear your experience historicized while you were living it ? 
The day was saturated with the weight of its own impending history . 
Long lines of people waited to buy special souvenir World Series postcards with official postmarks . 
Thousands of us had paid $ 5 for the official souvenir book with its historical essays on Series trivia , its historical photographs of great moments in Series past , and its instructions , in English and Spanish , for filling in the scorecard . 
Pitcher = lanzador . 
Homerun = jonron . 
Players ran out on the field way below , and the stands began to reverberate . 
It must be a local custom , I thought , stamping feet to welcome the team . 
But then the noise turned into a roar . 
And no one was shouting . 
No one around me was saying anything . 
Because we all were busy riding a wave . 
Sixty thousand surfers atop a concrete wall , waiting for the wipeout . 
Only at the moment of maximum roll did I grasp what was going on . 
Then I remembered the quake of '71 , which I experienced in Santa Barbara in a second-story motel room . 
When the swaying of the building woke me up , I reasoned that a ) I was in Southern California ; b ) the bed was moving ; c ) it must be a Magic Fingers bed that had short-circuited . 
Then I noticed the overhead light was swaying on its cord and realized what had happened . 
What should I do ? 
Get out of the possibly collapsing building to the parking lot . 
But the lot might split into crevasses , so I had better stand on my car , which probably was wider than the average crevasse . 
Fortunately , the quake was over before I managed to run out and stand naked on the hood . 
At the Stick , while the world shook , I thought of that morning and then it struck me that this time was different . 
If I survived , I would have achieved every journalist 's highest wish . 
I was an eyewitness of the most newsworthy event on the planet at that moment . 
What was my angle ? 
How would I file ? 
All these thoughts raced through my head in the 15 seconds of the earthquake 's actual duration . 
The rest is , of course , history . 
The Stick did n't fall . 
The real tragedies occurred elsewhere , as we soon found out . 
But for a few minutes there , relief abounded . 
A young mother found her boy , who had been out buying a hotdog . 
The wall behind me was slightly deformed , but the center had held . 
And most of us waited for a while for the game to start . 
Then we began to file out , to wait safely on terra firma for the opening pitch . 
It was during the quiet exodus down the pristine concrete ramps of the Stick that I really understood the point of all those Walkmen and Watchmen . 
The crowd moved in clumps , clumps magnetized around an electronic nucleus . 
In this way , while the Stick itself was blacked out , we kept up to date on events . 
Within 15 minutes of the quake itself , I was able to see pictures of the collapsed section of the Bay Bridge . 
Increasingly accurate estimates of the severity of the quake became available before I got to my car . 
And by then , expensive automobile sound systems were keeping the gridlocked parking lot by the bay informed about the fire causing the big black plume of smoke we saw on the northern horizon . 
Darkness fell . 
But the broadcasts continued through the blacked-out night , with pictures of the sandwiched highway ganglion in Oakland and firefighting in the Marina district . 
By then , our little sand village of cars had been linked with a global village of listeners and viewers . 
Everyone at the Stick that day had started out as a spectator and ended up as a participant . 
In fact , the entire population of the Bay Area had ended up with this dual role of actor and audience . 
The reporters were victims and some of the victims turned into unofficial reporters . 
The outstanding example of this was the motorist on the Bay Bridge who had the presence of mind to take out a video camera at the absolutely crucial moment and record the car in front as it fell into the gap in the roadway . 
The tape was on tv before the night was out . 
Marshall McLuhan , you should have been there at that hour . 
Investors who received Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. 's latest stock commentary may be left with blank expressions . 
The first 10 pages of the 76-page Weekly Portfolio Perspective are completely blank , except for the page numbers . 
Rather than printing devils , Shearson puts all the blame on the unpredictable stock market . 
The plunge made Shearson 's market commentary instantly out of date . 
In fact , last Friday 's 190.58-point tumble in the stock market caught many people and businesses by surprise , not the least of them brokerage firms such as Shearson that print their weekly market commentaries on Fridays for dissemination the following week . 
Shearson , a 62%-owned unit of American Express Co. , did n't have enough time to update its market commentary so , `` We decided to kill our strategy pieces , '' says Jack Rivkin , the head of Shearson 's research department . 
The first thought some investors had was that a red-faced Shearson must have been wildly bullish on stocks in its original commentary , and that 's why it purged its pages . 
Investors recalled that Shearson last week had been advising that `` the market is still exhibiting all the signs of a further advance . '' 
Many other brokerage firms had similarly bullish views . 
But Mr. Rivkin insists that the 10 pages were n't pulled because they were too bullish . 
Instead , he says , `` they were cautious , and that was n't the message we wanted to deliver '' on Monday . 
As Mr. Rivkin explains it , `` We were raising some caution flags about rate rises in Europe and concerns about the LBO market . 
And by late Friday afternoon , actually after the close , we decided that was the wrong tone to take . 
With the market down , we wanted to tell people to put their orders in on the opening . '' 
Both before and after the Friday plunge , Shearson has maintained a recommended portfolio weighting of 65 % stocks , 20 % bonds and 15 % cash . 
Sheldon B. Lubar , chairman of Lubar & Co. , and John L. Murray , chairman of Universal Foods Corp. , were elected to the board of this engine maker . 
They succeed Robert W. Kasten and John R. Parker , who reached the mandatory retirement age . 
China 's slide toward recession is beginning to look like a free fall . 
In a report on China 's foundering economy , the official State Statistical Bureau disclosed that industrial output last month rose 0.9 % from a year earlier - the lowest growth rate in a decade for September . 
Retail sales are plummeting , while consumer prices still are rising . 
Chinese and foreign economists now predict prolonged stagflation : low growth and high inflation . 
`` The economy is crashing hard , '' says an Asian economist in Beijing . 
`` The slowdown is taking hold a lot more quickly and devastatingly than anyone had expected . '' 
A lengthy recession , if it materializes , would drain state coffers and create severe hardships for urban workers . 
Experts predict the coming year will be characterized by flat or negative industrial growth , rising unemployment and a widening budget deficit . 
Unless the government suddenly reverses course , wages for most workers wo n't keep pace with inflation , creating a potential source of urban unrest . 
The economy 's slowdown is due only partly to the austerity program launched in September 1988 to cool an overheated economy and tame inflation . 
( Industrial output surged 21 % in 1988 , while inflation peaked last February at nearly 30 % . ) 
The slowdown also results from chronic energy and raw-materials shortages that force many factories to restrict operations to two or three days a week . 
In Western , market-driven countries , recessions often have a bright side : prodding the economy to greater efficiency . 
In China , however , there is n't likely to be any silver lining because the economy remains guided primarily by the state . 
Instead , China is likely to shell out ever-greater subsidies to its coddled state-run enterprises , which ate up $ 18 billion in bailouts last year . 
Nor are any of these inefficient monoliths likely to be allowed to go bankrupt . 
Rather , the brunt of the slowdown will be felt in the fast-growing private and semi-private `` township '' enterprises , which have fallen into disfavor as China 's leaders re-emphasize an orthodox Marxist preference for public ownership . 
`` When the going gets rough , China penalizes the efficient and rewards the incompetent , '' says a Western economist . 
Reports of an economy near recession come as officials prepare a major Communist Party plenum for sometime in the next few weeks . 
The meeting is expected to call for heightened austerity for two years . 
But with industrial growth stagnant and inflation showing signs of easing , some voices may call for measures to pump new life into the economy . 
Some analysts believe China soon will begin relaxing economic controls , particularly by loosening credit . 
That would benefit Chinese enterprises as well as Sino-foreign joint ventures , both of which have been plagued by shortages of working capital . 
A dangerous buildup this year of billions of dollars in inter-company debts threatens , if unchecked , to bring the economy to a collapse . 
One sign of a possible easing of credit policy was the decision this week of People 's Bank of China , the central bank , to allocate $ 5.4 billion in short-term loans to pay farmers for the autumn harvest , the official China Daily reported . 
But while pumping more money into the economy would bring relief to many industries , it also runs the risk of triggering another period of runaway growth and steep inflation . 
The cycle has been repeated several times since China began reforming its planned economy in 1979 . 
And , because China 's leaders have abandoned plans to drastically reform the economy , it is likely to continue , analysts say . 
The statistical bureau 's report , cited in China Daily , notes that industrial output in September totaled $ 29.4 billion , a rise of just 0.9 % from a year earlier . 
Output declined in several provinces , including Jiangsu and Zhejiang , two key coastal areas , and Sichuan , the nation 's agricultural breadbasket . 
Production in Shanghai , China 's industrial powerhouse and the largest source of tax revenue for the central government , fell 1.8 % for the month . 
Nationwide , output of light industrial products declined 1.8 % -- `` the first decline in 10 years , '' a bureau spokesman told China Daily . 
In an unusually direct statement , the bureau spokesman recommended that state banks extend more credit to shopkeepers so that they can purchase manufacturers ' goods . 
`` This will prevent a slide in industrial production , which will otherwise cause new panic buyings , '' the spokesman said . 
The 1986 tax overhaul , the biggest achievement of President Reagan 's second term , is beginning to fall apart , and interest groups are lining up for tax goodies all over Capitol Hill . 
Real-estate executives are lobbying to ease anti-tax-shelter rules . 
Charitable groups are trying to reinstate the write-off for contributions made by individuals who do n't itemize their deductions . 
Big auction houses want to make collectibles eligible for lower capital-gains taxes . 
And heavy-industry lobbyists are quietly discussing the possibility of reinstating the investment tax credit . 
`` Everything is up for grabs , '' says Theodore Groom , a lobbyist for mutual life-insurance companies . 
Adds Robert Juliano , the head lobbyist for a variety of interests that want to protect the tax deduction for travel and entertainment expenses : `` It appears as though the whole thing is wide open again . '' 
The catalyst has been the congressional move to restore preferential tax treatment for capital gains , an effort that is likely to succeed in this Congress . 
Other fundamental `` reforms '' of the 1986 act have been threatened as well . 
The House seriously considered raising the top tax rate paid by individuals with the highest incomes . 
The Senate Finance Committee voted to expand the deduction for individual retirement accounts , and also to bring back income averaging for farmers , a tax preference that allows income to be spread out over several years . 
As part of the same bill , the finance panel also voted in favor of billions of dollars in narrow tax breaks for individuals and corporations , in what committee member Sen. David Pryor ( D. , Ark . ) calls a `` feeding frenzy '' of special-interest legislating . 
The beneficiaries would range from pineapple growers to rich grandparents to tuxedo-rental shops . 
To be sure , the full Senate , facing a fast-approaching budget deadline , last Friday stripped away all of the tax breaks that were contained in the Finance Committee bill . 
But lawmakers of both parties agree that the streamlining was temporary . 
Other bills will be moving soon that are expected to carry many of the tax cuts , including both the capital-gains and IRA provisions . 
`` There is n't any doubt that the thread of the '86 code has been given a mighty tug , '' says Rep. Thomas Downey ( D. , N.Y . ) . 
`` You 'll see the annual unraveling of it . '' 
`` It 's back to tax-give-away time for the select few , '' says Rep. William Gray of Pennsylvania , the third-ranking Democrat in the House . 
Referring to the chairmen of the Senate and House tax-writing committees , he adds , `` Next year , every special-interest group is going to be there knocking on Lloyd Bentsen 's door , on Danny Rostenkowski 's door . '' 
Many groups are n't waiting that long . 
Just last week , a House Ways and Means subcommittee held a lengthy meeting to hear the pleas of individual cities , companies and interest groups who want to open their own special loopholes . 
`` It 's a Swiss-cheese factory and the cheese smells pretty good , '' commented one veteran lobbyist who was watching the proceedings . 
Even lobbyists for heavy industry , one of the interests hit hardest in the 1986 bill , are encouraged . 
The return of pro-investment tax breaks such as those for capital gains and IRAs `` creates more of a mood or a mindset that is helpful for getting better depreciation ( write-offs ) or investment credits , '' says Paul Huard , a vice president for the National Association of Manufacturers . 
Corporate lobbyist Charls Walker is planning a spring conference to discuss what tax changes to make to improve `` competitiveness . '' 
In reaction to proposed capital-gains legislation , groups are lobbying to make sure they are n't left off the gravy train . 
Real-estate interests , for example , are protesting an omission in President Bush 's capital-gains proposal : It does n't include real-estate gains . 
`` If there is going to be a tax scheme that contemplates lower treatment of capital gains , they certainly want to be part of it , '' says real-estate lobbyist Wayne Thevenot of Concord Associates . 
In the House-passed tax bill , Mr. Thevenot got his wish ; real-estate assets are included in the capital-gains provision . 
But Sotheby 's , Christie 's and the National Association of Antique Dealers are still trying to get theirs . 
They have sent a letter to congressional tax-writers asking that gains from the sale of collectibles also be given preferential treatment . 
`` Collectibles should continue to be recognized as capital assets , '' the letter states . 
All of this talk is antithetical to the Tax Reform Act of 1986 . 
In exchange for dramatically lower tax rates , the framers of that legislation sought to eliminate most of the exemptions , deductions and credits that gave some taxpayers an advantage over others . 
The goal was to tax people with roughly equivalent incomes equally , and to eliminate the many shelters that allowed the wealthy to escape taxes . 
Two of the major ways that tax-writers managed to attain these ends were to scrap the preferential treatment of capital gains and to curtail the use of paper losses , also known as passive losses , that made many tax shelters possible . 
Many other tax benefits also were swept away . 
This year Congress , with prodding from President Bush , has been busy trying to put many of these same tax preferences back into the code . 
It appears likely that , this year or next , some form of capital-gains preference and passive-loss restoration will be enacted . 
Other tax benefits probably will be restored and created . 
The main obstacle is finding a way to pay for them . 
`` The '86 act was a fluke . 
They wanted reform and they got a revolution , '' says overhaul advocate Rep. Willis Gradison ( R. , Ohio ) . 
So , is the tax code now open game again ? 
Mr. Juliano thinks so . 
One recent Saturday morning he stayed inside the Capitol monitoring tax-and-budget talks instead of flying to San Francisco for a fund-raiser and then to his hometown of Chicago for the 30th reunion of St. Ignatius High School . 
`` I 'm too old to waste a weekend , but that 's what I did , '' the 48-year-old Mr. Juliano moans . 
`` These days , anything can happen . 
Lufthansa AG said passenger volume climbed 5.2 % for the first nine months of 1989 to 15.3 million passengers from 14.5 million passengers in the year-earlier period . 
The West German national air carrier said cargo volume jumped 12 % to 638,000 metric tons from 569,000 tons a year ago . 
Load factor , or percentage of seats filled , climbed to 67.1 % from 66.6 % , even though the number of flights rose 6.9 % to 215,845 in the first-three quarters . 
From January through September , the distance flown by Lufthansa airplanes rose 5.6 % to 266.2 million kilometers from a year earlier , the company added . 
Raymond Chandler , in a 1950 letter defending a weak Hemingway book , likened a champion writer to a baseball pitcher . 
When the champ has lost his stuff , the great mystery novelist wrote , `` when he can no longer throw the high hard one , he throws his heart instead . 
He throws something . 
He does n't just walk off the mound and weep . '' 
Chandler might have been predicting the course of his own career . 
His last published novel featuring private detective Philip Marlowe , the inferior `` Playback '' ( 1958 ) , at times read almost like a parody of his previous work . 
When he died in 1959 , Chandler left behind four chapters of yet another Marlowe book , `` The Poodle Springs Story , '' which seemed to go beyond parody into something like burlesque . 
`` Champ '' Chandler 's last pitch , apparently , was a screwball . 
Now Robert Parker , author of several best sellers featuring Spenser , a contemporary private eye in the Marlowe mold , has with the blessings of the Chandler estate been hired to complete `` The Poodle Springs Story . '' 
The result , `` Poodle Springs '' ( Putnam 's , 288 pages , $ 18.95 ) is an entertaining , easy to read and fairly graceful extension of the Marlowe chronicle , full of hard-boiled wisecracks and California color . 
If it does not quite have Chandler 's special magic -- well , at the end , neither did Chandler . 
As the book begins , a newly wed Marlowe roars into the desert resort of Poodle ( a.k.a . Palm ) Springs at the wheel of a Cadillac Fleetwood . 
His bride is the rich and beautiful Linda Loring , a character who also appeared in Chandler 's `` The Long Goodbye '' and `` Playback . '' 
Philip and Linda move into her mansion and ca n't keep their hands off each other , even in front of the Hawaiian / Japanese houseman . 
But the lovebirds have a conflict . 
He wants to continue being a low-paid private eye , and she wants him to live off the million dollars she 's settled on him . 
That 's Chandler 's setup . 
Mr. Parker spins it into a pretty satisfying tale involving Poodle Springs high life , Hollywood low life and various folk who hang their hats in both worlds . 
The supporting lineup is solid , the patter is amusing and there 's even a cameo by Bernie Ohls , the `` good cop '' of previous Chandler books who still does n't hesitate to have Marlowe jailed when it suits his purposes . 
The style throughout bears a strong resemblance to Chandler 's prose at its most pared down . 
All told , Mr. Parker does a better job of making a novel out of this abandoned fragment than anyone might have had a right to expect . 
But there are grounds for complaint . 
At one point , the reader is two steps ahead of Marlowe in catching on to a double identity scam -- and Marlowe is supposed to be the pro . 
More bothersome , there are several apparent anachronisms . 
Contact lenses , tank tops , prostitutes openly working the streets of Hollywood and the Tequila Sunrise cocktail all seem out of place in the 1950s . 
A little more care in re-creating Marlowe 's universe would have made the book that much more enjoyable . 
Mr. Nolan is a contributing editor at Los Angeles Magazine . 
Ko Shioya spent eight years as the editor in chief of the Japanese edition of Reader 's Digest . 
`` Japan has been a major importer of foreign information and news , '' says Mr. Shioya . 
`` But one gets fed up with importing information and news . '' 
Mr. Shioya has turned the tables . 
Today , he is publisher of Business Tokyo magazine , the first English-language business magazine devoted to coverage of Japanese business . 
After a slick redesign , the two-year-old magazine has been relaunched this month by its parent company , Keizaikai Corp. , the Tokyo-based company with interests that include financial services , book publishing and a tourist agency . 
Printed in the U.S. and carrying the line `` The Insider 's Japan , '' Business Tokyo 's October cover story was `` The World 's No. 1 Customer '' -- Japanese women . 
Keizaikai is one of a small but growing band of Japanese companies taking their first steps into American publishing , after making major investments in entertainment , real estate and banking companies here . 
Japanese concerns have retained a number of publishing consultants and media brokers to study the U.S. market , including the New York-based investment banker Veronis , Suhler & Associates . 
And they are quietly linking up with U.S. publishing trade groups . 
`` Japanese publishers want to be introduced to the publishing and information industries , '' said John Veronis , chairman of Veronis Suhler . 
While there are n't any major deals in the works currently on the scale of Sony Corp. 's recent $ 3.4 billion agreement to buy Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. , observers do n't rule out a transaction of that size . 
`` The Japanese take the long view . '' said Mr. Veronis . 
`` It may not be weeks or months , but they are also opportunistic and if they feel comfortable , they will move on a deal , '' he said . 
In recent months , three big Tokyo-based publishing concerns -- including Nikkei Business Publications , Nikkei Home ( no relation ) , and Magazine House -- applied for membership in Magazine Publishers of America , which represents almost all U.S. consumer magazines . 
Japanese involvement in American publishing has been so small to date that magazines such as Business Tokyo are considered groundbreakers . 
When Keizaikai launched Business Tokyo in 1987 , it appealed to a more multinational audience . 
The magazine was overhauled with the aid of American magazine design gurus Milton Glaser and Walter Bernard , and targets top-level U.S. executives with Japanese and American advertisers . 
American publishers appear more than ready to do some selling . 
Susumu Ohara , president of Nihon Keizai Shinbun America Inc. , publisher of the Japan Economic Journal , said he receives telephone calls weekly from media bankers on whether his parent company is interested in buying a U.S. consumer or business magazine . 
`` The Japanese are in the early stage right now , '' said Thomas Kenney , a onetime media adviser for First Boston Corp. who was recently appointed president of Reader 's Digest Association 's new Magazine Publishing Group . 
`` Before , they were interested in hard assets and they saw magazines as soft . 
Now they realize magazines are as much a franchise as Nabisco is a franchise . 
Bell Atlantic Corp. and Southern New England Telecommunications posted strong profit gains for the third quarter , while Nynex Corp. , Pacific Telesis Group and U S West Inc. reported earnings declines for the period . 
Rate settlements in Minnesota and Colorado depressed U S West 's third-quarter profit . 
Denver-based U S West said net income dropped 8.9 % , noting that the year-ago quarter included the sale of a building by its BetaWest Properties unit . 
Revenue dropped 4.3 % to $ 2.3 billion from $ 2.4 billion , reflecting declines in its consumer-telephone sector , long-distance carrier business and diversified division . 
Revenue from business-telephone operations grew 3.3 % to $ 618.9 million from $ 599.4 million a year ago . 
New telephone lines posted healthy growth . 
Overall they increased 2.8 % to 12.1 million , putting U S West over the 12 million mark for the first time . 
Business lines increased 3.7 % to 3.3 million . 
`` On a truly comparable basis , we 've seen modest earnings growth this year from the operations of our company , '' said Jack MacAllister , chairman and chief executive officer . 
`` The major negative factor was the cumulative impact of regulatory activity over the past two years . '' 
He said the company expects to be `` on target '' with analysts ' projections by year end but conceded that the fourth quarter represents `` a significant challenge . '' 
Expenses in the quarter dropped 11.2 % to $ 664.3 million from $ 747.7 million a year ago . 
Yesterday , U S West shares rose 75 cents to close at $ 71.25 in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
Philadelphia-based Bell Atlantic said net rose 6.5 % , aided by strong growth in the network-services business and an increase in the number of new telephone lines . 
Revenue jumped 5.6 % to $ 2.9 billion from $ 2.8 billion in the year-ago quarter . 
Revenue from financial and real-estate services jumped 23 % to $ 177.4 million from $ 144.1 million a year ago . 
Network-access revenue from long-distance telephone companies increased 6.4 % to $ 618.6 million . 
Bell Atlantic added 148,000 new telephone lines in the quarter for a total of 16.9 million . 
The company said per-share earnings were slightly reduced by the sale of 4.1 million shares of treasury stock to the company 's newly formed Employee Stock Ownership Plans . 
In composite trading on the Big Board , Bell Atlantic closed at $ 100.625 , up $ 1.50 a share . 
At Nynex , net slumped 14.8 % , primarily because of a continuing strike by 60,000 employees , lower-than-expected profit at its New York Telephone unit and significantly higher taxes and costs . 
State and local taxes increased to $ 131.3 million from $ 99.1 million a year ago . 
Nynex said expenses rose 4.5 % to $ 2.73 billion from $ 2.61 billion , a $ 119 million increase . 
Most of the higher costs were associated with acquisitions and growth in nonregulated business units , it added . 
`` Our net income is n't where we would want it to be at this point , '' said William C. Ferguson , chairman and chief executive officer . 
`` This deviation from our past growth patterns is caused largely by lower earnings at New York Telephone . '' 
Mr. Ferguson said a continued softness in New York City area 's economy and increased competition , particularly in the private-line market , took a heavy toll on earnings . 
The three-month-old strike at Nynex seriously hurt the installation of new telephone lines in the quarter . 
Nynex said access lines in service at the end of the quarter were off 18,000 from the previous quarter , which reported an increase of 160,000 new access lines . 
Revenue rose to $ 3.31 billion from $ 3.18 billion , mostly from acquisition of AGS Computers and robust non-regulated businesses . 
In Big Board composite trading yesterday , Nynex common closed at $ 81.125 , up $ 1.625 . 
Southern New England Telecommunications , which bolstered its marketing efforts for telephone and non-telephone subsidiaries , reported that net increased 8.1 % . 
Walter H. Monteith Jr. , SNET chairman and chief executive officer , said : `` Innovative marketing of our products and services contributed to increase revenue . '' 
Revenue and sales increased 7.5 % to $ 423.9 million from $ 394.4 million a year earlier . 
Yellow pages advertising sales rose 11.8 % to $ 41.2 million . 
Cost and expenses for the quarter , excluding interest , increased 6.1 % to $ 333.3 million from $ 314 million the year before . 
SNET common rose $ 1.25 to $ 85.50 a share yesterday in composite trading on the Big Board . 
San Francisco-based Pacific Telesis said net declined 12.6 % , primarily because of regulatory action . 
Revenue was about flat at $ 2.4 billion . 
Revenue was reduced $ 33 million by three extraordinary items : a California Public Utilities Commission refund for an American Telephone & Telegraph Co. billing adjustment ; a provision for productivity sharing to be paid to customers in 1990 and a one-time accrual for a toll settlement with long-distance telephone companies . 
Excluding the one-time charges , the company would have posted earnings of $ 298 million , or 73 cents a share . 
The company also was hurt by a $ 289 million rate reduction that went into effect in 1989 . 
`` This is a good quarter for us in terms of our business fundamentals , '' said Sam Ginn , chairman and chief executive officer . 
Pacific Telesis said new telephone lines increased 4.5 % for a total of about $ 13.5 million for the quarter ; toll calls increased 9.6 % to 807 million and minutes of telephone usage increased to 9.9 billion . 
In Big Board composite trading yesterday , Pacific Telesis common closed at $ 45.50 , up 87.5 cents . 
a - Includes a one-time gain of $ 88.7 million from a commonstock sale by U S West 's U S West New Vector Group . 
b - Includes a $ 41.3 million gain on the sale of FiberCom . 
Amoco Corp. said third-quarter net income plunged 39 % to $ 336 million , or 65 cents a share , as gasoline refining and marketing profits lagged substantially behind last year 's record level . 
A charge of $ 80 million related to projected environmental costs in its refining and marketing operations further depressed results . 
A spokesman said Amoco completed an environmental analysis last quarter but that no single clean-up project was responsible . 
In the 1988 third quarter , the Chicago-based oil company earned $ 552 million , or $ 1.07 a share . 
Revenue in the latest quarter rose 12 % to $ 6.6 billion from $ 5.91 billion . 
Aside from the special charge , Amoco 's results were in line with Wall Street estimates . 
The company 's stock ended at $ 48.375 , up 25 cents in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
Amoco is the first major oil company to report third-quarter results . 
Analysts expect others to show a similar pattern . 
Generally in the quarter , overproduction of gasoline and higher crude oil prices pressured profitability . 
The industry 's chemical profits also declined because excess capacity has depressed prices . 
Gasoline margins may rebound this quarter , some industry officials say , but they believe chemical margins could worsen . 
American Petrofina Inc. , a Dallas-based integrated oil company , yesterday said its third-quarter earnings declined by more than half . 
Fina blamed lower chemical prices , reduced gasoline margins and refinery maintenance shutdowns . 
It said net income dropped to $ 15.1 million , or 98 cents a share , from $ 35.2 million , or $ 2.66 a share . 
Sales rose 2.2 % to $ 711.9 million from $ 696.1 million . 
Amoco 's refining and marketing profit in the quarter fell to $ 134 million from $ 319 million . 
Chemical earnings declined by one-third to $ 120 million last year 's robust levels . 
Amoco 's domestic oil and natural gas operations recorded a profit of $ 104 million in the quarter compared with a loss of $ 5 million , `` primarily on the strength of higher crude oil prices , '' said Chairman Richard M. Morrow . 
Amoco also sharply boosted natural-gas output , part of it from properties acquired from Tenneco Inc. last year . 
But foreign exploration and production earnings fell sharply , to $ 12 million from $ 95 million . 
Higher oil prices were n't enough to offset a roughly $ 20 million charge related to a 10 % reduction in Amoco 's Canadian work force as well as increased exploration expenses . 
For the nine months , Amoco said that net income fell to $ 1.29 billion from $ 1.69 billion but if unusual items are excluded , operations produced essentially flat results . 
Revenue rose 12 % to $ 19.93 billion from $ 17.73 billion . 
James F. Gero , former chairman and chief executive officer of Varo Inc. , and Richard J. Hatchett III , a Dallas investment banker , were elected directors of this medical-products concern , boosting the board to seven members . 
For retailers , Christmas , not Halloween , promises to be this year 's spookiest season . 
Many retailers fear a price war will erupt if cash-strapped companies such as Campeau Corp. slash tags to spur sales . 
Concerns about the stock market , doubts about the economy in general and rising competition from catalog companies also haunt store operators . 
`` Profits at Christmas could be under attack for every retailer , '' asserts Norman Abramson , president and chief operating officer of Clothestime Inc. , an off-price chain . 
Even if there is n't any widespread discounting , the outlook for industry profits is n't good . 
Management Horizons forecasts a 1.4 % profit decline for non-auto retailers this year , after annual drops that averaged 4.5 % in 1988 and 1987 . 
`` For the last two and a half years , retailing has been in a mild recession , '' says Carl Steidtmann , chief economist at the Columbus , Ohio , consulting firm . 
This year , many stores are entering the Christmas season in turmoil : Bonwit Teller and B. Altman parent L.J. Hooker Corp. is operating under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code ; B.A.T Industries PLC 's healthy Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field 's chains are on the auction block ; Campeau 's Bloomingdale 's is also on the block . 
Industry observers expect a wide divergence in performance . 
Stores in a state of confusion are likely to fare poorly , and to lose customers to stable chains such as Limited Inc. , May Department Stores Co. and Dillard Department Stores Inc. , which should do well . 
`` There are going to be very clear winners and very clear losers , '' says Cynthia Turk , a Touche Ross & Co. retail consultant . 
Says Mr. Steidtmann : `` I 'm looking for a bi-polar Christmas . '' 
Economists expect general merchandise sales in the fourth quarter to rise 4.5 % to 6 % from year-ago figures . 
But Mr. Steidtmann predicts that healthy stores hawking mostly apparel could ring up gains of as much as 25 % to 30 % . 
Troubled chains could see their sales drop as much as 8 % , he believes , as managers distracted by fears about the future allow their stores to get sloppy . 
Thin merchandise selections at the most troubled chains are also expected to hurt sales . 
Catalog companies are likely to pose a bigger threat to all stores this year , particularly in December . 
More than 200 catalog outfits are promoting a low-cost Federal Express service that guarantees pre-Christmas delivery of orders made by a certain date . 
`` Traditionally , consumers were concerned about ordering after the first of December because they did n't believe they would get it by Christmas , '' says Adam Strum , chairman of the Wine Enthusiast Inc. , which sells wine cellars and accessories through the mail . 
Using Federal Express delivery last year , Mr. Strum says , `` December was our biggest month . '' 
Even Sears , Roebuck & Co. is getting into the act , offering for the first time to have Federal Express deliver toys ordered by Dec. 20 from its Wish Book catalog . 
K mart Corp. Chairman Joseph E. Antonini summed up his outlook for the Christmas season as `` not troublesome . '' 
He 's not predicting a blockbuster , but he is `` more optimistic than three months ago '' because employment remains strong and inflation low . 
Other retailers are also preparing for a ho-hum holiday . 
Philip M. Hawley , chairman of Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc. , expects sales at department stores open at least a year to rise a modest 3 % to 5 % over last year 's totals , both for his company and the industry in general . 
`` I 'm not looking for a runaway Christmas at all , '' he says . 
`` It is n't a real boom holiday season in our eyes , '' says Woolworth Corp. Chairman Harold E. Sells , `` but it is n't going to be a bust either . '' 
Mr. Sells expects fourth-quarter sales at his company -- which besides Woolworth stores includes Kinney and Foot Locker shoe stores and other specialty chains -- to rise `` pretty much in line '' with its year-to-date increases of between 8 % and 9 % . 
The estimate includes the results of new stores . 
A consumer poll conducted in early September by Leo J. Shapiro & Associates , a market researcher based in Chicago , also suggests a modest holiday . 
Of the 450 survey respondents , 35 % said they expect to spend less buying Christmas gifts this year than last year , while 28 % said they expect to spend more and 37 % said their gift budget would stay the same . 
The results are almost identical to Shapiro 's September 1988 numbers . 
Retailers could get a boost this year from the calendar . 
Christmas falls on a Monday , creating a big last-minute weekend opportunity for stores . 
Most will stay open late Saturday night and open their doors again Sunday . 
But many consumers probably will use the extra time to put off some purchasing until the last minute . 
`` What you 'll hear as we get into December is that sales are sluggish , '' predicts Woolworth 's Mr. Sells . 
`` The week ending the 24th is going to save the entire month for everyone . 
The Spanish author Camilo Jose Cela won the Nobel Prize for literature yesterday , a surprising choice , but given the Swedish Academy 's past perversities , hardly the most undeserved and ridiculous accolade handed out by the awarding committee . 
In Spain , anyway , the 73-year-old Mr. Cela enjoys some renown for the novels and travel books he wrote during the parched Franco years , the everyday poverty and stagnant atmosphere of which he described in brutally direct , vivid prose , beginning with `` The Family of Pascal Duarte '' ( 1942 ) . 
Unlike other writers who either battled the fascists during the Civil War , or left Spain when Franco triumphed , Mr. Cela fought briefly on the general 's side , no doubt earning with his war wound some forbearance when he went on to depict a country with a high population of vagabonds , murderers and rural idiots trudging aimlessly through a dried-out land . 
Still , it was in Argentine editions that his countrymen first read his story of Pascal Duarte , a field worker who stabbed his mother to death and has no regrets as he awaits his end in a prison cell : `` Fate directs some men down the flower-bordered path , and others down the road bordered with thistles and prickly pears . 
The lucky ones gaze out at life with serene eyes and smile with a face of innocence at their perfumed happiness . 
The others endure the hot sun of the plains and scowl like cornered wild beasts . '' 
Mr. Cela himself was one of the lucky ones , his fortunes steadily increasing over the decades he spent putting out some 70 travelogues , novels , short story collections and poetry . 
These days , he is as known for his flamboyant tastes and the youthful muse who shares his life as he is for his books . 
The man who wore out his shoes wandering around Guadalajara in 1958 , describing in his travel book `` Viaje a la Alcarria '' how he scrounged for food and stayed in squalid inns , now tours Spain in a Rolls-Royce . 
Of his 10 novels , `` The Hive '' ( 1951 ) , full of sharp vignettes of Madrid life and centered on a cafe run by Dona Rosa , a foul-mouthed , broad-based woman with blackened little teeth encrusted in filth , used to be available in English , translated by J.M. Cohen and published by Ecco Press , which now no doubt regrets relinquishing its copyright . 
Here is an excerpt : 
The lonely woman walks on in the direction of the Plaza de Alonso Martinez . 
Two men have a conversation behind one of the windows of the cafe on the corner of the boulevard . 
Both are young , one twenty odd , the other thirty odd . 
The older one looks like a member of the jury for a literary award , the younger one looks like a novelist . 
It is evident that their conversation runs more or less on the following lines : `` I 've submitted the manuscript of my novel under the title ` Teresa de Cepeda , ' and in it I 've treated a few neglected aspects of that eternal problem which ... '' 
`` Oh , yes . 
Will you pour me a drop of water , if you do n't mind ? '' 
`` With pleasure . 
I 've revised it several times and I think I may say with pride that there is not a single discordant word in the whole text . '' 
`` How interesting . '' 
`` I think so . 
I do n't know the quality of the works my colleagues have sent in , but in any case I feel confident that good sense and honest judgment ... '' 
`` Rest assured , we proceed with exemplary fairness . '' 
`` I do n't doubt it for a moment . 
It does not matter if one is defeated , provided the work that gets the award has unmistakable qualities . 
What 's so discouraging is ... '' 
In passing the window , Senorita Elvira gives them a smile -- simply out of habit . 
Ashland Oil Inc. said it will take after-tax charges of $ 78 million , or $ 1.40 a share , in its fiscal fourth quarter , ended Sept. 30 . 
Because of the charge , Ashland expects to report a loss for the fourth quarter and `` significantly lower results '' for fiscal 1989 . 
The oil refiner said it will report fiscal fourth quarter and 1989 results next week . 
The company earned $ 66 million , or $ 1.19 a share , on revenue of $ 2.1 billion in the year-ago fourth quarter . 
For fiscal 1988 , Ashland had net of $ 224 million , or $ 4.01 a share , on revenue of $ 7.8 billion . 
Both revenue figures exclude excise taxes . 
The charges consist of : a $ 25 million after-tax charge to cover cost overruns in Ashland 's Riley Consolidated subsidiary ; a previously announced $ 38 million after-tax charge resulting from a $ 325 million settlement with National Iranian Oil Co. and a $ 15 million after-tax charge from the previously announced sale of its Ashland Technology Corp. subsidiary . 
Ashland expects that sale to be complete next year . 
The charge for the Riley subsidiary is for expected costs to correct problems with certain bed boilers built for utilities . 
The charge will be added to $ 20 million in reserves established a year ago to cover the cost overruns . 
When President Bush arrives here next week for a hemispheric summit organized to commemorate a century of Costa Rican democracy , will he be able to deliver a credible message in the wake of the Panamanian fiasco ? 
Undoubtedly Mr. Bush will be praised by some Latin leaders prone to pay lip service to nonintervention , while they privately encourage more assertive U.S. action to remove Gen. Manuel Noriega and safeguard their countries from a Sandinista onslaught . 
The Panamanian affair is only the tip of a more alarming iceberg . 
It originates in a Bush administration decision not to antagonize the U.S. Congress and avoid , at all costs , being accused of meddling in the region . 
The result has been a dangerous vacuum of U.S. leadership , which leaves Central America open to Soviet adventurism . 
`` The { influence of the } U.S. is not being felt in Central America ; Washington 's decisions do not respond to a policy , and are divorced from reality , '' says Fernando Volio , a Costa Rican congressman and former foreign minister . 
The disarray of the Bush administration 's Latin diplomacy was evident in the failure of the Organization of American States to condemn categorically Gen. Noriega . 
Faced with this embarrassment , U.S. diplomats expressed confidence that the influential Rio Group of South American nations , which gathered last week in Peru , would take a stronger posture toward the Panamanian dictator . 
But other than a few slaps on the wrist , Gen. Noriega went unpunished by that body , too ; he was not even singled out in the closing statement . 
Now Mr. Bush will come to Costa Rica and encounter Nicaraguan strongman Daniel Ortega , eager for photo opportunities with the U.S. president . 
The host , Costa Rican President Oscar Arias , did not invite Chile , Cuba , Panama or Haiti to the summit , which was to be restricted to democracies . 
However , Mr. Ortega was included . 
Formally upgrading the Sandinistas to a democratic status was an initiative harshly criticized in the Costa Rican press . 
Even Carlos Manuel Castillo -- the presidential candidate for Mr. Arias 's National Liberation Party -- made public his opposition to the presence of Nicaragua `` in a democratic festivity . '' 
Nevertheless , the Bush administration agreed to the dubious arrangement in July , a few weeks before the Central American presidents met in Tela , Honduras , to discuss a timetable for disbanding the anti-Sandinista rebels . 
According to officials in Washington , the State Department hoped that by pleasing President Arias , it would gain his support to postpone any decision on the Contras until after Mr. Ortega 's promises of democratic elections were tested next February . 
However , relying on an ardent critic of the Reagan administration and the Contra movement for help in delaying the disarming of the Contras was risky business . 
And even some last-minute phone calls that Mr. Bush made ( at the behest of some conservative U.S. senators ) to enlist backing for the U.S. position failed to stop the march of Mr. Arias 's agenda . 
Prior to this episode , Sen. Christopher Dodd ( D. , Conn. ) , sensing an open field , undertook a personal diplomatic mission through Central America to promote an early disbanding of the rebels . 
Visiting Nicaragua , he praised the Sandinistas for their electoral system and chided the Bush administration for not rewarding the Sandinistas . 
In Honduras , where the Contras are a hot political issue , he promised to help unblock some $ 70 million in assistance withheld due to the failure of local agencies to comply with conditions agreed upon with Washington . 
Aid was also the gist of the talks Sen. Dodd had with Salvadoran President Alfredo Cristiani ; Mr. Cristiani 's government is very much at the mercy of U.S. largess and is forced to listen very carefully to Sen. Dodd 's likes and dislikes . 
It was therefore not surprising that close allies of the U.S. , virtually neglected by the Bush administration , ordered the Nicaraguan insurgents dismantled by December , long before the elections . 
Fittingly , the Tela Accords were nicknamed by Hondurans `` the Dodd plan . '' 
The individual foreign policy carried out by U.S. legislators adds to a confusing U.S. performance that has emboldened Soviet initiatives in Central America . 
On Oct. 3 , following conversations with Secretary of State James Baker , Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze arrived in Managua to acclaim `` Nicaragua 's great peace efforts . '' 
There , Mr. Shevardnadze felt legitimized to unveil his own peace plan : The U.S.S.R. would prolong a suspension of arms shipments to Nicaragua after the February election if the U.S. did likewise with its allies in Central America . 
He also called on Nicaragua 's neighbors to accept a `` military equilibrium '' guaranteed by both superpowers . 
The Pentagon claims that in spite of Moscow 's words , East bloc weapons continue to flow into Nicaragua through Cuba at near-record levels . 
Since Mr. Shevardnadze 's proposals followed discussions with Mr. Baker , speculations arose that the Bush administration was seeking an accommodation with the Soviets in Central America . 
This scheme would fit the Arias Plan , which declared a false symmetry between Soviet military aid to the Sandinista dictatorship and that provided by Washington to freely elected governments . 
Furthermore , it is also likely to encourage those on Capitol Hill asking for cuts in the assistance to El Salvador if President Cristiani does not bend to demands of the Marxist guerrillas . 
The sad condition of U.S. policy in Central America is best depicted by the recent end to U.S. sponsorship of Radio Costa Rica . 
In 1984 , the Costa Rican government requested help to establish a radio station in the northern part of the country , flooded by airwaves of Sandinista propaganda . 
Recovering radiophonic sovereignty was the purpose of Radio Costa Rica , funded by the U.S. and affiliated with the Voice of America ( VOA ) . 
A few months ago , the Bush administration decided to stop this cooperation , leaving Radio Costa Rica operating on a shoestring . 
According to news reports , the abrupt termination was due to fears that VOA transmissions could interfere with the peace process . 
In the meantime , Russia gave Nicaragua another powerful radio transmitter , which has been installed in the city of Esteli . 
It is capable of reaching the entire Caribbean area and deep into North America . 
Perhaps its loud signal may generate some awareness of the Soviet condominium being created in the isthmus thanks to U.S. default . 
The Soviet entrenchment in Nicaragua is alarming for Costa Rica , a peaceful democracy without an army . 
Questioned in Washington about what would happen if his much-heralded peace plan would fail , President Arias voiced expectations of direct U.S. action . 
A poll conducted in July by a Gallup affiliate showed that 64 % of Costa Ricans believe that if their country is militarily attacked by either Nicaragua or Panama , the U.S. will come to its defense . 
But in the light of events in Panama , where the U.S. has such clear strategic interests , waiting for the Delta Force may prove to be a dangerous gambit . 
Mr. Daremblum is a lawyer and a columnist for La Nacion newspaper . 
Holiday Corp. said net income jumped 89 % , partly on the strength of record operating income in its gaming division . 
Separately , the hotel and gambling giant said it was proceeding with plans to make a tender offer and solicit consents with respect to approximately $ 1.4 billion of its publicly traded debt . 
That debt is part of the $ 2.1 billion of Holiday debt that Bass PLC of Britain said it would retire or assume when it agreed to buy the Holiday Inn business in August . 
Holiday said third-quarter earnings rose to $ 39.8 million , or $ 1.53 a share , from $ 21 million , or 84 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Results for the quarter included $ 19.2 million in pretax gains from property transactions , including the sale of one Embassy Suites hotel , and $ 3.5 million of nonrecurring costs associated with the acquisition of the Holiday Inn business by Bass . 
Holiday said operating income related to gaming increased 4.5 % to a record $ 61.4 million from $ 58.8 million a year earlier . 
The jump reflected record results in Las Vegas , Nev. , and Atlantic City , N.J. , as well as a full quarter 's results from Harrah 's Del Rio in Laughlin , Nev . 
Third-quarter revenue rose 2.7 % to $ 433.5 million from $ 422.1 million . 
For the nine months , earnings fell 2.9 % to $ 99.1 million , or $ 3.86 a share , from $ 102.1 million , or $ 4.10 a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue dropped 1.6 % to $ 1.21 billion from $ 1.23 billion . 
The tender offer and consent solicitation will be made to debtholders in December . 
In effect , Holiday is asking holders for permission for Bass to buy their debt . 
Holiday said Salomon Brothers Inc. has been retained to act as the dealer-manager and financial adviser in connection with the offer and solicitation . 
The debt issues involved and the proposed consent fees and cash tender offer prices ( expressed per $ 1,000 of principal amount ) are as follows : 10 1\/2 % senior notes due 1994 at 101 % ; 11 % subordinated debt due 1999 at 102 % ; 9 3\/8 % notes due 1993 at 100 % ; and 8 3\/8 % notes due 1996 at 95.25 % . 
Holiday said its 15 % notes due 1992 also will be included in the tender offer and consent solicitation at a price to be determined by Holiday prior to the commencement of the offer . 
The television units of Paramount Communications Inc. and MCA Inc. are exploring the possibility of offering prime-time programming to independent stations two nights a week , industry executives say . 
Although such a venture would n't match the `` fourth network '' created by News Corp. 's Fox Broadcasting Co. , MCA and Paramount may have similar ambitions . 
Fox , which also owns six TV stations , provides programs three nights a week to those and other affiliates . 
Paramount Domestic TV and MCA TV formed a joint venture last month , named Premier Advertiser Sales , to sell advertising in programs syndicated by both companies , such as `` Star Trek : the Next Generation , '' `` Charles in Charge '' and `` Friday the 13th : the Series . '' 
A spokeswoman for Paramount said the company does n't comment on speculation . 
Calls to Shelly Schwab , president of MCA TV , were n't returned . 
The two companies , like Fox , already have their own TV stations . 
MCA owns WWOR in New York and Paramount last month agreed to purchase a 79 % stake in the TVX Broadcast Group from Salomon Inc. in a deal valued at $ 140 million . 
TVX owns five stations , including WTXF , a Fox affiliate , in Philadelphia . 
One broadcasting executive familiar with the project said the co-venture would target stations affiliated with Fox because Fox has the desirable independent stations in most of the key cities . 
Currently , Fox supplies programs on Saturdays , Sundays and Mondays , although the company plans to expand to other weeknights . 
Jamie Kellner , president of Fox Broadcasting , said , `` We believe the partnership of Fox , its affiliates and advertisers is succeeding and will continue to grow . '' 
Another Fox official , who declined to be identified , said Fox was n't pleased by the possible Paramount-MCA venture into prime-time programming . 
`` To make the venture work , they would need Fox affiliates , '' he said . 
`` We spent a lot of time and money in building our group of stations , '' he said , adding that Fox does n't `` appreciate '' another company attempting to usurp its station lineup . 
Fox said it plans to offer its stations movies , theatrical and made-for-TV ventures , probably on Wednesdays , sometime next year . 
It is also planning another night of original series . 
Paramount and MCA , according to the broadcasting executive , plan to offer theatrical movies produced separately by Paramount and MCA for Wednesdays and perhaps a block of original shows Fridays . 
The executive said Paramount and MCA have also held discussions with Chris-Craft Industries ' broadcasting unit , which owns five independent stations in cities such as Los Angeles , San Francisco and Portland , Ore . 
A Chris-Craft station manager said there have been no formal talks . 
`` I think it 's to Fox 's advantage to be associated with the Paramount-MCA venture , '' said Michael Conway , station manager of WTXF , the TVX station that is a Fox affiliate . 
Mr. Conway said the Fox shows appearing on nights when Paramount-MCA shows would n't be offered could be promoted on the programs produced by Paramount-MCA . 
Michael Fisher , general manager of KTXL , a Fox affiliate in Sacramento , Calif. , said , `` The real question is whether the Paramount-MCA offering is practical . 
It is n't ... . 
Why would I consider giving up Fox , a proven commodity , '' for an unknown venture ? 
Fox attracts a young audience with shows such as `` Married ... With Children , '' its most successful series . 
Banco Popular de Puerto Rico and BanPonce Corp. -- agreed to merge in a transaction valued at $ 324 million . 
Under the agreement , BanPonce stockholders will be able to exchange each of their shares for either shares in the new entity or cash . 
In each case , the exchange is valued at $ 56.25 a share . 
The two companies , both based in San Juan , will form a bank holding company with assets of just over $ 9 billion . 
The holding company will be called BanPonce Corp . 
The primary subsidiary will be the combined banking operations of the two companies and will be known as Banco Popular de Puerto Rico . 
Rafael Carrion Jr. , chairman of Banco Popular , will be the chairman of the holding company . 
Alberto M. Paracchini , currently chairman of BanPonce , will serve as president of the bank holding company and chairman of the subsidiary . 
Banco Popular originally proposed the merger in July , in a cash and stock transaction valued at $ 50 a share , or about $ 293 million . 
BanPonce reacted cooly at first , but appeared to be won over , analysts said , by Banco Popular 's assurances that it wanted only a friendly transaction . 
`` Banco Popular just kept waiting , '' said Edward Thompson , a vice president and analyst at Thomson BankWatch Inc. in New York . 
`` They got a transaction that 's good for both companies . '' 
The two banks appear to be a good fit . 
BanPonce caters to a more affluent customer , while Banco Popular has always had a large presence among middle-income and lower-income markets . 
The merger should also allow the companies to reduce costs by combining operations in many locations in Puerto Rico . 
`` They 're often right across the street from one another , '' Mr. Thompson said . 
Richard Carrion , who is currently president and chief executive officer of Banco Popular , said the merger will result in a `` larger and stronger locally based bank . '' 
Mr. Carrion , who will now serve as president and chief executive officer of the subsidiary bank , added : `` We 'll be able to better compete with large foreign banks . 
It makes sense from a strategic standpoint . '' 
The newly merged company will have 165 branches in Puerto Rico and 27 branches outside of the island . 
The banks said they do n't expect the merger to face any regulatory hurdles . 
Mr. Carrion said the merger should be completed in six to nine months . 
Hit by higher costs and lower sales , Caterpillar Inc. said third-quarter earnings tumbled 43 % and full-year earnings will trail last year 's results . 
The construction equipment maker said third-quarter profit fell to $ 108 million , or $ 1.07 a share , from $ 190 million , or $ 1.87 a share , a year earlier . 
Sales dropped 6 % to $ 2.58 billion from $ 2.74 billion , reflecting eight fewer business days in the latest quarter . 
The company , which is in a costly modernization program , said earnings were hurt by higher start-up and new program costs , increased costs of materials , higher wages and an $ 11 million provision for bad debts in Latin America . 
In announcing a 1989 capital spending plan of $ 950 million early this year , Caterpillar said full-year earnings would be flat compared with last year 's $ 616 million , or $ 6.07 a share . 
But yesterday , the company said this year 's profit will be lower . 
It did n't say by how much . 
Suffering from a downturn in heavy truck production that cut orders for its engines , Caterpillar also said it will indefinitely lay off about 325 workers in the Peoria area and temporarily shut its plant in York , Pa. , for two weeks in both November and December . 
For the first nine months of the year , Caterpillar said earnings fell 14 % to $ 390 million , or $ 3.85 a share , from $ 453 million , or $ 4.46 a share , a year earlier . 
Sales rose to $ 8.19 billion from $ 7.65 billion . 
Millicom Inc. said it is one of two companies to receive a license to introduce and operate a cellular mobile telephone system in Pakistan . 
The market during the start-up is estimated at 25,000 subscribers . 
A spokeswoman for Millicom , a telecommunications company , said she did n't know the value of the contract . 
Cable & Wireless PLC of Britain won the other license . 
Millicom said it would build and operate the system in Pakistan with Comvik International AB , part of the Kinnevik group of Sweden , and Arfeen International , Pakistan . 
B.A.T Industries PLC won overwhelming shareholder approval for a defensive restructuring to fend off a # 13.35 billion ( $ 21.23 billion ) takeover bid from Sir James Goldsmith . 
At a shareholders ' meeting in London , the tobacco , financial-services and retailing giant said it received 99.9 % approval from voting holders for plans to spin off about $ 6 billion in assets . 
B.A.T aims to sell such U.S. retailing units as Marshall Field and Saks Fifth Avenue and float its big paper and British retailing businesses via share issues to existing holders . 
Proceeds will help pay for a planned buy-back of 10 % , or about 153 million , of its shares and a 50 % dividend increase . 
B.A.T yesterday started its share buy-back . 
The company said it acquired 2.5 million shares for 785 pence ( $ 12.48 ) each , or a total of # 19.6 million ( $ 31.2 million ) , from its broker , Barclays de Zoete Wedd . 
The share buy-back plan is likely to underpin B.A.T 's share price . 
B.A.T said it may make more equity purchases until the close of business today , depending on market conditions , but will cease further purchases until Nov. 22 , when it releases third-quarter results . 
B.A.T shares rose 29 pence to 783 pence on London 's stock exchange yesterday . 
Shareholder approval sets the stage for a lengthy process of restructuring that might not be completed until next year 's second half . 
Before the recent tumult in global financial markets , B.A.T officials , holders and analysts had expected a substantial part of the restructuring to be complete by the end of the first half . 
`` We are not in any hurry to sell '' Saks , Marshall Field or B.A.T 's other U.S. retail properties , said Chairman Patrick Sheehy . 
`` This is n't a distress sale . 
We are determined to get good prices . '' 
Company officials say the flotations of the paper and British retailing businesses are likely only after the disposals of the U.S. retailing assets . 
Meanwhile , Sir James still is pursuing efforts to gain U.S. insurance regulators ' approval for a change in control of B.A.T 's Farmers Group Inc. unit . 
The Anglo-French financier has indicated he intends to bid again for B.A.T if he receives approval . 
Hasbro Inc. , the nation 's largest toy maker , reported third-quarter earnings increased 73 % from a year earlier on a 9.4 % sales gain , reflecting improved margins . 
Hasbro said it had net income of $ 31.3 million , or 53 cents a share , up from $ 18.1 million , or 31 cents a share , a year earlier , when it took a pretax charge of $ 10 million after dropping development of an interactive video entertainment system . 
Revenue rose to $ 403 million from $ 368.4 million . 
The company cited sales gains at its Milton Bradley and Playskool units and in its international business for the increase in revenue . 
Alan G. Hassenfeld , chairman and chief executive , added that Hasbro 's new line of battery-powered racing cars , called Record Breakers , and its acquisition of Cabbage Patch Kids , Scrabble and other lines from Coleco Industries Inc. puts the company `` in a good position as we enter the Christmas buying season . '' 
For the first nine months of the year , Hasbro 's net income rose 33 % to $ 68.2 million , or $ 1.15 a share , from $ 51.3 million , or 88 cents a share , on a 3.1 % increase in revenue to $ 992.7 million from $ 963 million a year earlier . 
Reebok International Ltd. posted a 35 % increase in third-quarter net income despite a slight decline in sales . 
The athletic footwear maker said net rose to $ 49.9 million , or 44 cents a share , from $ 37.1 million , or 32 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales declined 3 % to $ 524.5 million from $ 539.4 million . 
Paul Fireman , Reebok chairman and chief executive officer , said , `` Our gains in earnings provide further evidence that the controls we have put in place and our sales mix are continuing to improve the company 's overall profit performance . '' 
The company said it expects sales to improve due to a number of new products , including a `` pump '' basketball shoe that can be inflated to better fit the foot . 
In the first nine months , net was $ 140 million , or $ 1.23 a share , on sales of $ 1.44 billion . 
Separately , Reebok completed the acquisition of CML Group Inc. 's Boston Whaler unit , a builder of power boats . 
CML , Acton , Mass. , had agreed to sell the unit to Reebok for about $ 42 million . 
The agreement also called for Reebok to receive warrants to purchase 400,000 shares of CML common at $ 31.25 a share , exercisable at any time before July 1 , 
An outside spokesman for CML said the terms were changed to a minor extent but would n't disclose what those changes were . 
Pitney Bowes Inc. directors authorized the company to seek buyers for its Wheeler Group Inc. subsidiary , a direct mail marketer of office supplies . 
Pitney Bowes said the decision was based on a long-term analysis of the compatibility of Wheeler Group 's marketing business with other Pitney Bowes operations . 
Pitney Bowes acquired the core of what evolved into Wheeler Group in 1979 by buying Dictaphone Corp . 
A spokeswoman would n't comment on whether the company had talked with any potential buyers for the New Hartford , Conn. , unit , which had 1988 sales of about $ 75 million . 
She said Wheeler Group was profitable but would n't give figures . 
The spokeswoman said the company does n't have a timetable for the sale , adding that the board 's decision just starts the search for a buyer . 
Separately , Pitney Bowes said third-quarter net income gained 15 % to $ 62 million , or 78 cents a share , from $ 54 million , or 68 cents a share , a year ago . 
Revenue grew 13 % to $ 734.8 million from $ 650.9 million . 
The company said the growth was led by its major operations , particularly mailing , shipping , dictating and facsimile businesses . 
Steel jackets of a type that may have prevented collapse of the columns of a 1.5-mile stretch of the Nimitz Freeway had been installed on at least a small test section of the double-decker highway last year by California 's Department of Transportation , employees familiar with the project say . 
The test project -- which reportedly survived Tuesday 's earthquake -- was a prelude to a state plan to retrofit that critical section of the freeway with the steel casings . 
State engineers have made a preliminary finding that it was failure of the concrete columns , wrenched and separated from the double-decker roadbed , that was responsible for the collapse . 
The failure in Oakland of the freeway segment known as the Cypress structure was the deadliest aspect of the quake , although officials were hopeful yesterday that the death toll there might be significantly lower than the 250 initially feared . 
Sorting out the wreckage is expected to take several days . 
Red tractors gingerly picked at the rubble while jackhammers tried to break up some of the massive slabs of concrete . 
Giant yellow cranes were wheeled up alongside the collapsed segment , preparing to lift off chunks of the debris . 
In Sacramento , a transportation department spokesman said he could n't immediately confirm or deny existence of the test work . 
However , he asserted that the department had n't mastered the technology needed to retrofit the entire Cypress structure . 
Moreover , other officials noted , snafus in transportation funding that the state has experienced over the years may have restricted the availability of funds for such a retrofitting , even if it were technologically feasible . 
Knowledgeable employees said the retrofitting , which had n't yet been budgeted , was part of a planned , three-stage reinforcement of the Cypress structure begun by the California transportation department several years ago . 
The Cypress reinforcement project itself was part of an annual effort to shore up structures believed vulnerable to earthquakes . 
The state began such work after a 1971 tremblor in Southern California , when numerous bridges collapsed . 
`` We had just finished phase two '' of the Cypress project that involved installing a series of retaining cables designed to prevent sections of the roadway from separating as a result of seismic shock , a state DOT engineer said . 
After completing installation of the jackets on `` one frame '' of the freeway last year , the state DOT had sent the project over to its Sacramento engineers to draw up a final design . 
Knowledgeable employees said the project had been stymied somewhat by `` the difficulty of designing '' the jackets . 
The procedure involves encasing the concrete columns with steel , then connecting them more securely to the double-decker roadbed . 
The employees also said the project may have been snagged by budgetary concerns . 
One preliminary estimate put the retrofitting cost at as much as $ 50 million . 
The collapse of the span has provoked surprise and anger among state officials . 
Gov. George Deukmejian , who said he had been assured by state transportation officials that the structure could withstand an even larger quake , called for an immediate investigation . 
`` I want to know who made the decision that it was safe for 186,000 people to use every day , '' said Richard Katz , a state legislator who is chairman of the California Assembly 's transportation committee . 
He said he would convene hearings within two weeks . 
The Cypress structure opened in June 1957 , and as such , like many buildings in the San Francisco Bay area , does not meet current building codes requiring considerably more steel support . 
The northern piers of the span lie in estuarian deposits that were of a type to have liquefied easily during the 1906 quake . 
Transportation department officials , however , said they were as surprised as anyone by the Cypress destruction . 
They said previous earthquakes suggested that multiple-column viaducts would stand up well , although they were working on ways to bolster them . 
`` Unfortunately , there is only one laboratory for developing techniques to withstand earthquakes , and that is an earthquake , '' said Burch Bachtold , San Francisco district director for the transportation department . 
He said : `` We know of no technology that exists anywhere in the world that would allow us to '' reinforce the columns . 
Financial Corp. of Santa Barbara said it rescheduled to Nov. 29 a special shareholder meeting to vote on a $ 75 million stock-for-debt exchange . 
The meeting had been scheduled for Nov. 10 but the company delayed the meeting to allow time for the Securities and Exchange Commission to review the proposal . 
As part of a restructuring announced earlier this year , the company proposed in August to exchange 168 newly issued common shares for each $ 1,000 face value of debt . 
However , that figure could be revised , Financial Corp. said . 
Currently , the company has about six million common shares outstanding . 
If all the debt was converted , about 13 million new shares would be issued . 
In composite trading Wednesday on the New York Stock Exchange , Financial Corp. closed at $ 1.125 , unchanged . 
The debt consists of $ 50 million of 13 3\/8 % subordinated notes due 1998 , and $ 25 million of 9 % convertible subordinated debentures due 2012 . 
Financial Corp. also is proposing to exchange each of its 130,000 outstanding shares of cumulative convertible preferred series A stock for two shares of common . 
After years of quarreling over Bonn 's `` Ostpolitik '' , West Germany and the U.S. appear to have shifted onto a united course in Eastern Europe . 
Bonn and Washington have taken a leading role in aid for the reformist countries , pledging billions of dollars in fresh credit and forgiving old debt while urging other industrial nations to follow suit . 
Both hope to encourage pressure for change in East bloc countries still ruled by Stalinist holdouts by arranging liberal financial aid and trade benefits for Poland , Hungary and , to a lesser extent , the Soviet Union . 
West German officials also have the special goal of holding out hope for East Germany 's fledgling reform movement . 
`` The change taking place in the Soviet Union , Poland and Hungary has aroused new hope in both German states that reforms will be undertaken in { East Germany } , and that relations between the two German states , too , will get better , '' said Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher . 
Addressing a conference of the New York-based Institute for East-West Security Studies in Frankfurt yesterday , Mr. Genscher said , `` History will judge us by whether we have taken the opportunities that emerge from these reforms . '' 
The ultimate aim of Western support for East bloc reforms , he said , is to create `` an equitable and stable peaceful order in Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals . '' 
Mr. Genscher and U.S. Secretary of Commerce Robert A. Mosbacher , in separate speeches at the conference , appealed for more Western contributions to economic reforms and business development in Hungary and Poland . 
Bonn and Washington are leading supporters of Poland 's request for a $ 1 billion stand-by credit from the International Monetary Fund . 
`` We want the bold programs of market development and political freedom in Hungary and in Poland to succeed . 
We are prepared to support those changes , '' said Mr. Mosbacher . 
U.S. curbs on the exports of sensitive technology to East bloc countries will remain in place , however . 
Meanwhile , the U.S. House of Representatives yesterday approved an $ 837.5 million aid package for Poland and Hungary that more than doubles the amount President Bush had requested . 
The package was brought to the House just 15 days after it was introduced , indicating Congress 's eagerness to reward Poland and Hungary for their moves toward democracy and freemarket economic reforms . 
The legislation , approved 345-47 and sent to the Senate , establishes two enterprise funds , to be governed by independent nonprofit boards , which will make loans and investments in new business ventures in Hungary and Poland . 
The Polish fund would be seeded with $ 160 million , the Hungarian fund with $ 40 million . 
In addition , a group of 24 industrialized countries , including the U.S. and Japan and coordinated by the European Community Commission , has promised Poland and Hungary trade advice and a line of credit equivalent to $ 1.11 billion through the European Investment Bank , while the EC plans $ 222 million in direct aid . 
When Chancellor Helmut Kohl travels to Poland Nov. 9 , he is expected to take with him a promise of three billion West German marks ( $ 1.6 billion ) in new credit guarantees for industrial projects . 
Last week , Bonn agreed to reschedule 2.5 billion marks in Polish debt that came due last year . 
In addition , a one billion mark credit dating from 1974 is to be written off . 
Poland 's plan to switch to a free-market economy by 1991 is hampered by a foreign debt load of $ 39.2 billion . 
West Germany also has increased its credit guarantees to Hungary by 500 million marks to 1.5 billion marks as the emerging democratic state rushes through its own economic reforms , including a broad privatization of state-owned industry and tax incentives for industrial investment . 
An additional 500 million marks in credit-backing was promised by the West German state governments of Bavaria and Baden-Wuerttemberg . 
Deutsche Bank AG , which last year arranged a three billion mark credit for the Soviet Union , is now moving to become the first West German bank to set up independent business offices in Hungary and Poland as they shift to free-market economies . 
A maxim of Frankfurt banking holds that wherever Deutsche Bank goes , other West German banks follow . 
Indeed , at least four other West German banks are believed to be making inquiries . 
Mattel Inc. said third-quarter net income rose 73 % , to $ 38 million , or 76 cents a share , from $ 21.9 million , or 45 cents a share , a year ago . 
Revenue rose 34 % to $ 410 million from $ 306.6 million a year earlier . 
`` Mattel 's world-wide volume has grown 25 % in a climate of relatively flat industry sales , '' said John W. Amerman , chairman . 
He said the toy company 's `` prospects for a strong fourth quarter '' are also good . 
Mattel attributed the jump in quarter net to strong world-wide sales of its Barbie doll , Hot Wheels cars , Disney toys and other well-known toy lines . 
The company also cited retail trade and consumer demand for new products introduced this year , such as Cherry Merry Muffin and Turtle Tots . 
For the nine months , Mattel net more than doubled to $ 58.9 million , or $ 1.19 a share , from $ 25.4 million , or 53 cents a share , a year ago . 
Revenue rose 25 % , to $ 877.6 million , from $ 702.4 million . 
Mattel said the company 's sale of rights to land and buildings at its Hawthorne , Calif. , headquarters resulted in a $ 13 million charge to third-quarter operating profit . 
The charge did n't affect net for the quarter as it was offset by tax benefits . 
Mattel has purchased a new headquarters building in El Segundo , Calif. , which it will occupy by the end of next year . 
Democracy can be cruel to politicians : Sometimes it forces them to make choices . 
Now that the Supreme Court opened the door on the subject of abortion , politicians are squinting under the glare of democratic choice . 
Their discomfort is a healthy sign for the rest of us . 
Republicans are squinting most painfully , at least at first , which is only fair because they 've been shielded the most . 
So long as abortion was a question for litigation , not legislation , Republicans could find political security in absolutism . 
They could attract one-issue voters by adopting the right-to-life movement 's strongest position , even as pro-choice Republicans knew this mattered little on an issue monopolized by the court . 
Now it matters . 
Much of Washington thought it detected George Bush in a characteristic waffle on abortion the past week . 
Only a month ago he 'd warned Congress not to pass legislation to pay for abortions in cases of rape or incest . 
Last Friday , after Congress passed it anyway , he hinted he was looking for compromise . 
Was the man who once was pro-choice , but later pro-life , converting again ? 
In fact , Mr. Bush 's dance was more wiggle than waffle . 
Pro-life advocates say the White House never wavered over the veto . 
Christopher Smith ( R. , N.J. ) , a pro-life leader in the House , suggested a compromise that would have adapted restrictive language from rape and incest exceptions in the states . 
The White House , never eager for a fight , was happy to try , which is why George Bush said he was looking for `` flexibility '' last week . 
When Democrats refused to budge , pro-life Republicans met at the White House with Chief of Staff John Sununu on Monday , and Mr. Bush quickly signaled a veto . 
Amid charges of `` timidity '' on Panama and elsewhere , the president was n't about to offend his most energetic constituency . 
The GOP doubters were in Congress . 
In last week 's House vote , 41 Republicans defected . 
After the vote , Connecticut Rep. Nancy Johnson rounded up nearly as many signatures on a letter to Mr. Bush urging him not to veto . 
Even such a pro-life stalwart as Sen. Orrin Hatch ( R. , Utah ) had counseled some kind of compromise . 
The Senate passed the same bill yesterday , with a veto-proof majority of 67 . 
The manuevering illustrates an emerging Republican donnybrook , pacified since the early 1980s . 
At the 1988 GOP convention , abortion was barely discussed at all , though delegates were evenly divided on the question of an anti-abortion constitutional amendment . 
Ms. Johnson made a passionate statement to the platform committee , but she was talking to herself . 
Now many Republicans are listening . 
They 're frightened by what they see in New Jersey , and especially Virginia , where pro-life GOP candidates for governor are being pummeled on abortion . 
Eddie Mahe , a Republican consultant , says the two GOP candidates could have avoided trouble if they had framed the issue first . 
( In Virginia , Marshall Coleman and his running mate , Eddy Dalton , are both on the defensive for opposing abortions even in cases of rape or incest . ) 
But Mr. Mahe adds , `` The net loser in the next few years is the right-to-life side . '' 
Darla St. Martin , of the National Right to Life Committee , says exit polls from the 1988 election had single-issue , pro-life voters giving Mr. Bush about five more percentage points of support than pro-choice voters gave Michael Dukakis . 
But the Supreme Court 's opening of debate may have changed even that . 
GOP pollster Neil Newhouse , of the Wirthlin Group , says polls this summer showed that the single-issue voters had about evened out . 
Polls are no substitute for principle , but they 'll do for some politicians . 
The Republican danger is that abortion could become for them what it 's long been for Democrats , a divisive litmus test . 
It 's already that in the Bush administration , at least for any job in which abortion is even remotely an issue . 
Oklahoma official Robert Fulton lost a chance for a senior job in the Department of Health and Human Services after right-to-life activists opposed him . 
Caldwell Butler , a conservative former congressman , was barred from a Legal Services post , after he gave wrong answers on abortion . 
Even the president 's doctor , Burton Lee , has said on the record that he 'd love to be surgeon general but could n't pass the pro-life test . 
In the case of HHS Secretary Louis Sullivan , the litmus test could yet damage issues important to other parts of the Republican coalition . 
After Mr. Sullivan waffled on abortion last year , the White House appeased right-to-lifers by surrounding him with pro-life deputies . 
Their views on health care and welfare did n't much matter , though HHS spends billions a year on both . 
It makes only a handful of abortion-related decisions . 
Though Democrats can gloat at all this for now , they may want to contain their glee . 
On abortion , their own day will come . 
Eventually even Republicans will find a way to frame the issue in ways that expose pro-choice absolutism . 
Does the candidate favor parental consent for teen-age abortions ? 
( The pro-choice lobby does n't . 
) What about banning abortions in the second and third trimesters ? 
( The lobby says no again . ) 
Democracy is forcing the abortion debate toward healthy compromise , toward the unpolarizing middle . 
Roe v. Wade pre-empted political debate , so the extremes blossomed . 
Now the ambivalent middle , a moral majority of sorts , is reasserting itself . 
Within a few years , the outcome in most states is likely to be that abortion will be more restricted , but not completely banned . 
This is where the voters are , which is where politicians usually end up . 
Union Pacific Corp . third-quarter net income fell 17 % . 
Excluding earnings from discontinued operations a year earlier , net fell only 2 % . 
The energy , natural resources and railroad concern had net of $ 137.4 million , or $ 1.35 a share , down from $ 165 million , or $ 1.44 a share , a year earlier . 
In the 1988 third quarter , profit from continuing operations totaled $ 140.1 million . 
A year earlier , the company had profit from discontinued operations of $ 24.9 million from sale of a pipeline , a refinery and an interest in a second refinery . 
Revenue rose 2 % to $ 1.58 billion from $ 1.54 billion . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Union Pacific jumped $ 1.375 to $ 75 a share . 
The company said its Union Pacific Railroad had a 3 % profit increase , despite a 14 % rise in fuel costs and a 4 % drop in car loadings . 
Most of the commodity traffic was off , the company said . 
Earnings from continuing operations of the Union Pacific Resources unit almost doubled , the company said . 
It added that higher revenue , strong crude oil prices and higher natural gas prices offset declines in production of oil , gas and plant liquids . 
In addition , the company cited cost-reduction moves and interest income . 
Earnings from Union Pacific Realty dropped 50 % to $ 3 million . 
Before good will , Overnite Transportation earnings fell 11 % to $ 15 million , Union Pacific said . 
In the nine months , net fell 6.3 % to $ 427.7 million , or $ 3.98 a share , from $ 456.4 million , or $ 4 a share , a year earlier . 
Profit from continuing operations in the year-earlier period was $ 402.7 million . 
Revenue was $ 4.75 billion , up 6 % from $ 4.49 billion . 
The Federal Trade Commission ruled that five major title-insurance companies illegally fixed prices for title search-and-examination services by participating in joint `` rating bureaus '' in six states . 
The FTC ordered the companies not to use rating bureaus in those six states . 
The commission order named the following companies : Ticor Title Insurance Co. of California , a unit of Los Angeles-based Ticor ; Chicago Title Insurance Co. and Safeco Title Insurance Co. , units of Chicago Title & Trust Co. ; Lawyers Title Insurance Corp. , a unit of Richmond , Va.-based Universal Corp. ; and Stewart Title Guaranty Co. , a unit of Houston-based Stewart Information Services Corp . 
Chicago Title & Trust acquired Safeco in 1987 and changed the unit 's name to Security Union Title Insurance Co . 
The FTC ruled that the companies violated federal antitrust law by fixing rates in the following states : New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Connecticut , Wisconsin , Arizona and Montana . 
The FTC first issued an administrative complaint in the case in 1985 . 
John Christie , a lawyer here for the two Chicago Title & Trust units accused the FTC of `` second-guessing '' state-level regulations , with which , he said , his clients had complied . 
`` I expect all the companies to appeal , '' he added . 
A lawyer for Lawyers Title said that , because the named companies no longer use the type of cooperative rating bureaus attacked by the FTC , the commission 's order wo n't have much practical impact . 
Officials for the other named companies did n't return telephone calls seeking comment . 
MARK RESOURCES INC. , Calgary , Alberta , said it agreed to sell 75 million Canadian dollars ( US$ 63.9 million ) of 8 % convertible debentures to a group of securities dealers . 
Mark , an oil and gas concern , said the 15-year debentures are convertible before maturity at C$ 12.50 for each Mark common share , and can be redeemed at the company 's option , under certain conditions , after Nov. 30 , 1992 . 
The government will try to sell all the real estate managed by the Federal Asset Disposition Association in one fell swoop , said William Seidman , chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp . 
The FADA real-estate package , with an asking price of $ 428 million , is comprised of 150 properties in Texas , California , Colorado , Arizona and Florida . 
It includes apartments , shopping centers , office buildings and undeveloped land . 
Mr. Seidman is chairman of the Resolution Trust Corp. , established to sell or merge the nation 's hundreds of insolvent savings-and-loan associations . 
The RTC , created by this year 's S&L bailout legislation , is trying to sell FADA 's network of offices separately . 
FADA , which holds problem assets of thrifts that were closed before the bailout legislation was enacted , is being liquidated . 
The properties held by FADA wo n't be sold piecemeal , Mr. Seidman said in a speech before Southern Methodist University Business School in Dallas . 
`` You need to buy the entire lot , '' Mr. Seidman said , `` so get out your checkbooks . 
The following were among yesterday 's offerings and pricings in the U.S. and non-U.S. capital markets , with terms and syndicate manager , as compiled by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report : 
Sequa Corp. -- $ 150 million of 9 5\/8 % notes due Oct. 15 , 1999 , priced at 99.75 to yield 9.664 % . 
The noncallable issue was priced at a spread of 170 basis points above the Treasury 's 10-year note . 
Rated Baa-2 by Moody 's Investors Service Inc. and triple-B-minus by Standard & Poor 's Corp. , the issue will be sold through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch Capital Markets . 
Virginia Public School Authority -- $ 55.7 million of school financing bonds , 1989 Series B ( 1987 resolution ) , due 19912000 , 2005 and 2010 , through a BT Securities Corp. group . 
The bonds , rated double-A by Moody 's and S&P , were priced to yield from 6 % in 1991 to 7.10 % in 2010 . 
Serial bonds were priced to yield to 6.75 % in 2000 . 
Bonds due 1991-1996 carry 6.70 % coupons and bonds due 1997-2000 carry 6 3\/4 % coupons . 
Term bonds due 2005 are n't being formally reoffered . 
They carry a 7 % coupon . 
Term bonds due 2010 are 7.10 % securities priced at par . 
St. Johns River Water Management District , Fla. -- $ 50,005,000 of land acquisition revenue bonds , Series 1989 , due 1990-2000 , 2003 , 2006 and 2009 , tentatively priced by a Smith Barney , Harris Upham & Co. group to yield from 6 % in 1990 to about 7.03 % in 2003 . 
There are $ 9.76 million of 7 % term bonds due 2003 , priced at 99 3\/4 to yield about 7.03 % . 
The $ 11,775,000 of term bonds due 2006 and the $ 13,865,000 of term bonds due 2009 are n't being formally reoffered . 
Serial bonds were priced at par to yield to 6.90 % in 2000 . 
The bonds are insured and rated triple-A by Moody 's and S&P . 
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. -- $ 500 million of Remic mortgage securities being offered in 12 classes by Salomon Brothers Inc . 
The offering , Series 105 , is backed by Freddie Mac 9 1\/2 % securities . 
Separately , $ 400 million of Freddie Mac Remic mortgage securities is being offered in 10 classes by Kidder , Peabody & Co . 
The offering , Series 106 , is backed by Freddie Mac 9 1\/2 % securities . 
According to available details , yields range from 8.70 % , a spread of 80 basis points over three-year Treasury securities , to 10.37 % , a spread of 230 basis points over 20-year Treasurys . 
The offerings bring Freddie Mac 's 1989 Remic issuance to $ 32.6 billion and its total volume to $ 46.5 billion since the program began in February 1988 . 
European Investment Bank ( agency ) -- 200 billion lire of 12 % bonds due Nov. 16 , 1995 , priced at 101 3\/4 to yield 12 % less full fees , via lead manager Banco Commercial Italiana . 
Fees 1 3\/4 . 
IBM International Finance ( U.S. parent ) -- 125 million European currency units of 9 1\/8 % bonds due Nov. 10 , 1994 , priced at 101 5\/8 to yield 9.13 % at the recommended reoffered price of par , via Banque Paribas Capital Markets . 
Societe Generale Australia Ltd . ( French parent ) -- 50 million Australian dollars of 17 % bonds due Nov. 20 , 1991 , priced at 101.90 to yield 16.59 less fees , via Westpac Banking Corp . 
Guaranteed by Societe Generale . 
Fees 1 1\/4 . 
Mitsubishi Trust & Banking Corp . ( Japan ) -- 200 million Swiss francs of privately placed convertible notes due March 31 , 1994 , with a fixed 0.75 % coupon at par , via Union Bank of Switzerland . 
Put option on March 31 , 1992 , at a fixed 107 3\/4 to yield 3.5 % . 
Callable from March 31 , 1992 , at 107 3\/4 , declining two points semi-annually to par . 
Each 50,000 Swiss franc note is convertible from Nov , 27 , 1989 , to March 21 , 1994 , at a premium over the closing share price Oct. 25 , when terms are scheduled to be fixed . 
Also , the company issued 300 million marks of convertible bonds with an indicated 2 3\/4 % coupon due March 31 , 1995 , at par , via Westdeutsche Landesbank Girozentrale Bank . 
Put on March 31 , 1992 , at an indicated 105 to yield 4.80 % . 
Call option beginning March 31 , 1992 , if the price of the stock rises more than 50 % within 30 trading days as well as a call option for tax reasons . 
Each 1,000 mark and 10,000 mark bond is convertible from Nov. 27 , 1989 , to March 21 , 1995 , at a price to be determined when terms are fixed Oct. 25 . 
Scandinavian Airlines System ( Sweden ) -- 100 million Swiss francs of 6 1\/8 % bonds due Nov. 24 , 1999 , priced at 100 3\/4 to yield 6.03 % , via Union Bank of Switzerland . 
Call from Nov. 24 , 1994 , at 101 1\/2 , declining 1\/4 point a year . 
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. -- $ 400 million of 10-year debentures with a coupon rate of 8.80 % , priced at par . 
The debentures , callable at par in five years , were priced at a yield spread of about 86 basis points above the Treasury 10-year note . 
The issue is being sold through Freddie Mac 's 17-member securities selling group . 
The debentures mature Oct. 27 , 1999 . 
The debentures will be available in book-entry form only in a minimum amount of $ 5,000 and additional increments of $ 5,000 . 
Interest will be paid semi-annually . 
First they get us to buy computers so we can get more information . 
Then the computers give us more information than we can ever read . 
Now they plan to sell us products that sift through all the information to give us what we really want to know . 
The products range from computer-edited , personal newsletters to systems that sit inside a personal computer and pick stories on selected topics off news wires . 
`` Filtered news is what people want , '' says Esther Dyson , editor of Release 1.0 , an industry newsletter that spots new developments . 
`` Most people read 10 times more than necessary in order to find out what they really need . '' 
Geoffrey Goodfellow , who dropped out of high school back in the 1970s to manage a computer network at a California research firm , says : `` Old network hands have started to turn off the network because they do n't have time to wade through the muck . '' 
Mr. Goodfellow has started a Menlo Park , Calif. , company called Anterior Technology that provides human editors for public electronic networks . 
`` I see it as a sewage treatment plant , '' he says . 
A new product , NewsEdge , carries five business news wires simultaneously into a user 's computer and beeps and flashes whenever an article appears that is of interest to the user . 
The product , developed by Desktop Data Corp. , a new company based in Waltham , Mass. , scans the wires looking for articles that contain key words specified by the user . 
One early user , David Semmel , a Chicago venture capitalist and investor in Desktop Data , says he uses it to track takeover developments . 
He says he told NewsEdge to look for stories containing such words as takeover , acquisition , acquire , LBO , tender , merger , junk and halted . 
`` I 'm pretty confident I 'm catching everything , '' he says . 
NewsEdge is pricey : $ 7,500 a year for a limited version , $ 40,000 a year if the cost of all the news wires is included . 
And it works best in high-powered personal computers . 
But some investors and consultants who have tried it are enthusiastic . 
Jeffrey Tarter , editor of SoftLetter , a Watertown , Mass. , industry newsletter , says : `` I 've seen a lot of people fooling around on the fringes of filtering information . 
This is the first time I 've seen something I could imagine a lot of people using . '' 
NewsEdge uses an FM radio band to carry news wires provided by Reuters , McGraw-Hill and Dow Jones & Co. , as well as PR Newswire , which carries corporate press releases . 
An FM receiver attached to a user 's personal computer receives the information . 
Some organizations have devised their own systems to sort through news wire items as they come in . 
George Goodwin , an account manager at Royal Bank of Canada , adapted a Lotus Development Corp. program called Agenda to sort through international news wires . 
It automatically selects stories from particular countries for reading by the international bankers responsible for lending in those areas . 
For those who do n't need their personalized information moment by moment , some services are offering overnight newsletters . 
Individual Inc. , a new company in Brookline , Mass. , uses filtering technology developed by Cornell University computer scientist Gerard Salton , to automatically produce customized newsletters it sends electronically to subscribers by 8 a.m. the next day . 
`` We are operating an information refinery that takes a broad stream of raw data and turns it into actionable knowledge , '' says Yosi Amram , founder and president . 
The daily newsletter , which is n't widely available yet , will have a base cost of $ 2,000 a year and provides full text of relevant articles under license agreements with Reuters , McGraw Hill , United Press International , two press release news wires and Japan 's Kyodo news service . 
One early user is NEC Corp. 's U.S. printer marketing arm . 
`` They want the full press releases on printer announcements by their competition , '' Mr. Amram says . 
It also tracks personnel and financial announcements by NEC 's distributors and customers . 
Individual Inc. 's technology goes beyond word searches by using a computerized thesaurus . 
If a customer asks for stories about `` IBM , '' the computer will also supply stories that mention `` I.B.M. , International Business Machines , or Big Blue , '' Mr. Amram says . 
Moreover , Individual Inc. 's computers can weigh the value of an article based on how closely the story matches the subscriber 's interest area . 
It compares the position of key words in the story ; words in the headline or first paragraph get a higher value . 
And it calculates how often the words appear in the story compared with how often they appear in the entire data base . 
The higher the ratio of hits to total words , the higher the presumed value to the reader . 
Pinpoint Information Corp. , Chantilly , Va. , a producer of $ 1,800-a-year personalized newsletters about the computer industry that started full operation last month , relies on 12 human readers to code news releases by topic in order to select items for each subscriber . 
`` The computers find all the key words they can , but the editors confirm every one . 
Computer picking is n't perfect , '' says Harvey Golomb , president and founder of Pinpoint . 
The humans also write abstracts of articles from some 200 computer industry publications . 
Once all the articles are coded and put in a data base , Pinpoint 's computers pick the most relevant for each subscriber and lay them out in a three-to-five-page newsletter format ; each newsletter is sent directly from the computer to the subscriber 's fax machine . 
Mr. Golomb says each of his computers can produce and send about 75 unique newsletters a night . 
Many computer network users who never see news wires would like to sort through their electronic mail automatically . 
So-called E-mail is the collection of inter-office memos , gossip , technical data , schedules and directives distributed over local and national computer networks . 
`` All these interconnected computers make it difficult to sort out what 's junk and what 's important , '' says Chuck Digate , a former Lotus Development executive who has started a new company to cope with the problem . 
Mr. Digate says his firm , Beyond Inc. , has licensed technology known as Information Lens from Massachusetts Institute of Technology and plans to develop it for commercial use . 
The MIT project devised ways for E-mail to be automatically categorized as top priority if it comes from certain designated senders or requires action in the next couple of days . 
Mr. Digate says that Beyond will refine the product `` so the message will be smart enough to know to come back and bother you again next week . '' 
And if a user is busy , `` he can set it for crisis mode : ` Do n't bother me with reports until Monday . ' '' 
A program called Notes , which is under development by Lotus , also is designed to sort E-mail sent within work groups . 
One thing that makes E-mail difficult to sift through is that each item looks the same . 
Notes , which is designed for advanced computers that display graphics , allows mail senders to put different logos on their mail . 
A daily news briefing from the company librarian , for example , would have a distinctive format on the screen , just as a paper version would have . 
`` With E-mail , you do n't have the visual clues of paper , '' says Mr. Tarter , the editor of SoftLetter . 
`` With Notes , they 're visually distinct . 
Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. lost its second recent arbitration case involving a former bond-trading executive . 
A New York Stock Exchange arbitration panel ordered Dean Witter to pay $ 404,294 in back bonuses to William Kelly , the company 's former head of high-yield , high-risk junk-bond trading and sales . 
It also awarded $ 196,785 in back bonuses to former trader Michael Newcomb and $ 69,105 in fees to the two men 's attorneys . 
The sums awarded to Messrs. Kelly and Newcomb represent bonuses the two men said they deserved from the first half of 1988 , but which were n't paid because of a dispute over an incentive contract . 
Jeffrey L. Liddle , the two men 's attorney at Liddle , O'Connor , Finkelstein & Robinson , said Mr. Kelly began working at Dean Witter in 1987 . 
Mr. Kelly built the company 's high-yield bond group , which has been a minor player in the junk-bond arena . 
Dean Witter lost a separate case involving a former bond executive earlier this year ; in August it paid $ 666,666 in back pay and a bonus to a former corporate-bond trading chief , Harold Bachman . 
That award ended a dispute between Dean Witter and Mr. Bachman over who was responsible for certain bond-trading losses around the time of the 1987 stock-market crash . 
A spokesman for Dean Witter , a unit of Sears , Roebuck & Co. , declined to comment . 
DILLARD DEPARTMENT STORES Inc. said it offered $ 50 million of 9 1\/2 % debentures due 2001 at par . 
The Little Rock , Ark. , department-store retailer said proceeds will be used to reduce short-term debt . 
Goldman , Sachs & Co. was the underwriter . 
American Brands Inc. said third-quarter net income rose 13 % , reflecting strong gains in its tobacco and distilled spirits businesses . 
The company , which also has businesses in life insurance , office products and hardware , and home-improvement products , said net income rose to $ 166.4 million , or $ 1.71 a share , from $ 146.8 million , or $ 1.53 a share , a year earlier . 
Year-earlier results for the quarter and the nine months were restated to reflect a change in accounting standards . 
Revenue declined 2 % , to $ 3.06 billion from $ 3.13 billion , because of the sale of Southland Life in March , and the impact of the stronger U.S. dollar on overseas results . 
Operating profit for world-wide tobacco products rose 10 % to $ 247.6 million . 
For distilled spirits , operating profit rose 36 % , to $ 24.8 million . 
In the first nine months , net rose 1.5 % , to $ 458.8 million , or $ 4.76 a share , from $ 452 million , or $ 4.50 a share , a year earlier . 
The year-earlier period included $ 40.1 million , or 41 cents a share , from discontinued operations . 
Revenue rose to $ 9.03 billion from $ 8.98 billion . 
The average number of shares outstanding rose 2 % in the third quarter but was down 4 % for the nine months . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , American Brands shares rose $ 1.75 to $ 73 . 
SANTA FE PACIFIC PIPELINE PARTNERS Limited Partnership , of Los Angeles , increased its quarterly cash dividend to 60 cents a unit from 55 cents , payable Nov. 14 to units of record Oct. 31 . 
The company is an independent refined-petroleum-products pipeline serving six Western states . 
WASHINGTON LIES LOW after the stock market 's roller-coaster ride . 
Lawmakers , haunted by charges that some of their comments contributed to the 1987 crash , generally shy away from calls for sweeping new legislation . 
But a House Energy and Commerce subcommittee will quiz SEC Chairman Breeden Wednesday , and Treasury Secretary Brady will go before the Senate Banking panel Thursday . 
The market 's wild week may speed along the market-reform legislation that has been pending for months in the aftermath of the 1987 crash . 
It may also expedite the SEC 's modest pending changes in junk-bond disclosure rules and intensify the Treasury 's look at plans for giving new tax breaks on dividends and raising taxes on short-term trades by pension funds . 
Brady and Breeden work well together on the plunge , despite the fact that the Treasury secretary opposed Breeden 's nomination to the SEC post . 
BAKER FALTERS in the Mideast amid Israeli paralysis and Palestinian politics . 
Despite seeing his plan for Israeli-Palestinian elections wither , the cautious secretary of state is so far unwilling to cut U.S. economic or military aid to force Israeli cooperation . 
Baker nonetheless remains furious both at Shamir , for backing down on the elections , and at Shamir 's rival , Peres , for political ineptitude in forcing a premature cabinet vote on Baker 's plan . 
Meanwhile , some U.S. officials fear PLO chief Arafat is getting cold feet and may back off from his recent moderation and renunciation of terrorism . 
He is under intense fire from other Palestinian groups ; Syria is pushing Ahmad Jibril , whose terrorist band is blamed for the Pan Am 103 bombing , as an alternative to Arafat . 
DARMAN'S MANEUVERS on the budget and capital gains hurt him in Congress . 
Republicans as well as Democrats were angered by the budget director 's rejection of Speaker Foley 's effort to expedite a deficitcutting measure by stripping it of the capital-gains tax cut as well as pet Democratic projects . 
Darman now blames the clash on miscommunication , but House GOP leader Michel , who carried the offer to him , observes , `` I was speaking English at the time , and quite loud so I could be understood . '' 
Senate GOP leader Dole ridicules the budget chief on the Senate floor . 
Democratic counterpart Mitchell , asked to interpret Darman 's threat to make permanent the across-the-board Gramm-Rudman cuts that took effect this week , says , `` I do n't even bother to interpret them . '' 
But Darman suggests such tensions will dissipate quickly . 
`` If I can show signs of maturity , almost anybody can , '' he jokes . 
HHS OFFICIALS expect Secretary Sullivan to continue a ban on research using fetal tissue . 
Before he was confirmed , Sullivan said he had `` reservations about any blanket prohibitions on medical research . '' 
But now , an official says , he is `` surrounded by right-to-lifers , '' who contend that any breakthroughs in fetal-tissue research could increase the demand for abortions . 
COOPERATION WANES on weapons development between the U.S. and Europe . 
Britain , France and Italy pull out of a proposal to build new NATO frigates ; the U.S. and West Germany have each withdrawn from missile projects . 
Defense experts say joint projects are increasingly squeezed by budget pressures and the desire to save domestic jobs ; some also fear rising protectionism as European unity nears . 
BOTH SIDES NOW : 
Virginia GOP lieutenant governor candidate Eddy Dalton tries to have it both ways on the abortion issue . 
Though she opposes abortion in almost all cases , she airs a TV commercial using pro-choice buzzwords . 
`` A woman ought to have a choice in cases where her life or health are in danger and in cases of rape or incest , '' she proclaims . 
HOT TOPIC : 
Interest in the abortion issue is so great that the Hotline , a daily , computer-distributed political newsletter , comes up with a spinoff product called the Abortion Report dealing solely with its political implications . 
CONSERVATIVES EXPECT Bush to solidify their majority on a key court . 
Bush has three vacancies to fill on the prestigious D.C. Circuit Court , which handles many important regulatory issues and is often considered a warm-up for future Supreme Court nominees . 
Conservatives now hold only a 5-4 edge . 
One slot is expected to go to EEOC Chairman Clarence Thomas , a black conservative ; after mulling a fight , liberals now probably wo n't put up a major struggle against him . 
Other conservatives thought to be on the administration 's short list include Washington lawyer Michael Uhlmann , who was passed over for the No. 2 job at the Justice Department , and Marshall Breger , chairman of a U.S. agency on administration . 
The Bush administration would also like to nominate a woman ; one possibility is former Justice Department official Victoria Toensing . 
MINOR MEMOS : 
In the wake of the failed Panama coup , a bumper sticker appears : `` Ollie Would Have Got Him . '' ... 
Rep. Garcia , on trial for bribery and extortion , puts statements in the Congressional Record attributing missed votes to `` scheduling conflicts . '' ... 
A GOP Senate fund-raising letter from Sen. Burns of Montana is made to appear personally written , and its opening line is , `` Please excuse my handwriting . '' 
But Burns confesses in an interview : `` That 's not my handwriting . 
MC SHIPPING Inc. , New York , declared an initial quarterly of 60 cents a share payable Nov. 15 to shares of record Oct. 30 . 
The announcement boosted the charter-shipping company 's shares , which closed at $ 15.125 , up $ 1.25 a share , in composite trading on the American Stock Exchange . 
The company , which went public in May , intends to pay dividends from available cash flow ; the amount may vary from quarter to quarter . 
Ever since the hotly contested America 's Cup race last year , the famous yachting match has run into more rough sailing out of the water than in it . 
Now that a key member of the San Diego Yacht Club team is splitting off to form his own team , even more competition lies ahead . 
Peter Isler , the winning navigator in the past two America 's Cup challenges , has split from the team led by Dennis Conner , skipper of the victorious Stars & Stripes , to form his own team for the next contest in 1992 . 
And , in addition to a crack team of sailors , Mr. Isler has lined up some real brass to help him finance the syndicate . 
Isler Sailing International 's advisory board includes Ted Turner , Turner Broadcasting chairman and a former Cup victor ; Peter G. Diamandis , head of Diamandis Communications , and Joseph B. Vittoria , chairman and chief executive of Avis Inc . 
His steering committee includes other notable businessmen , including the California investor and old salt Roy E. Disney . 
`` We have the structure , people and plan , '' Mr. Isler said in a statement . 
Now , the first order of business is raising enough money to keep his team afloat -- a new yacht will cost about $ 3 million alone , and sailing syndicate budgets can easily run to $ 25 million for a Cup challenge . 
The split comes in the midst of a court battle over whether the San Diego Yacht Club should be allowed to keep the international trophy for sailing a catamaran against the New Zealand challengers ' 90-foot monohull . 
In September , a New York appellate court overturned a state judge 's ruling that awarded the Cup to the New Zealand team . 
Pending an appeal by the New Zealand team , led by Michael Fay , the finals for the next Cup challenge are scheduled to be held in mid-1992 in San Diego . 
But because of the uncertainty of the outcome of the suit , Mr. Conner 's team has done little to begin gearing up to defend its title . 
`` If you do n't know what the rules of the game are , it 's hard to start your fund-raising or design , '' said Dana Smith , an official with Team Dennis Conner . 
The Conner team wo n't be able to negotiate with corporate sponsors until the suit is resolved and the race site is determined , Mr. Smith said , and the syndicate 's budget could easily reach $ 30 million . 
But spokesmen for both Mr. Isler and Mr. Conner say the formation of the new syndicate has to do with Mr. Isler 's desire to skipper his own team and begin planning now , rather than any falling out between the two sportsmen . 
Mr. Smith and a spokesman for the America 's Cup Organizing Committee insist that the added competition for the defender 's spot will only improve the race . 
Missouri farmer Blake Hurst writing in the fall issue of the Heritage Foundation 's Policy Review about the proposed location of a hazardous-waste incinerator in his county : 
Of course I 'd rather have a computer software firm in my backyard than a hazardous waste incinerator . 
But I 'd also rather live next door to an incinerator than to some of the hog farms I 've seen ( and smelt ) in these parts . 
An incinerator is also probably better than having nobody next door -- on our farm there are four unoccupied houses . 
On my four-mile drive to farm headquarters each morning , I drive by another four empty houses . 
A community of abandoned farmsteads , failing businesses , and crumbling roads and bridges is hardly a desirable one ... . 
The loss of 40 jobs by a depressed county in rural Missouri is hardly of national importance except for this : If the most environmentally safe way of dealing with a national problem can not be built in Atchinson County , what hope have we for dealing with the wastes our economy produces ? 
After all , farmers here work with `` hazardous '' chemicals every day , many of them the same chemicals that would have been destroyed in the incinerator . 
We know they are dangerous , but if handled with care , their benefits far outweigh any risk to the environment . 
Just because Stamford , Conn. , High School did nothing when its valuable 1930s mural was thrown in the trash does n't mean the city no longer owns the work of art , a federal judge ruled . 
The mural , now valued at $ 1.3 million according to appraisers , was tossed in a trash heap in 1971 by workers who were renovating the building . 
The 100-foot-long mural , painted by James Daugherty in 1934 , was commissioned by the federal Works Project Administration . 
After the discarded mural was found outside the school by a concerned Stamford graduate , it eventually was turned over to Hiram Hoelzer , a professional art restorer . 
Throughout the 1970s , Stamford school and city officials made no effort to locate the mural . 
Apparently the officials did n't even know the mural was missing until 1980 , when a researcher found that the painting was in Mr. Hoelzer 's studio and questioned school officials about it . 
In 1986 , Stamford officials thanked Mr. Hoelzer for taking care of the mural -- and demanded he return it as soon as possible . 
Mr. Hoelzer , however , sued Stamford , claiming that the city had abandoned the artwork and that it had waited too long to reclaim it . 
But Judge Louis L. Stanton of federal court in Manhattan ruled that the city could n't be faulted for waiting too long because it did n't realize until 1986 that its ownership of the painting was in dispute . 
The judge also ruled that the painting was n't abandoned because officials did n't intend for it to be thrown away and were unaware that the workmen had discarded it . 
Mr. Hoelzer did n't return phone calls seeking comment on the judge 's decision . 
The judge ordered that a hearing be held Nov. 17 to determine how much the city should pay Mr. Hoelzer for his services . 
Mary E. Sommer , corporate counsel for Stamford , said the city has discussed several possible plans for displaying the mural , which portrays various scenes from the Great Depression . 
She said the mural `` preserves an era in Stamford and in our country when this type of work was being done . 
The prices of corn futures contracts jumped amid rumors that the Soviet Union is keeping up its dizzying October buying binge of U.S. corn . 
Those rumors were confirmed after the end of trading yesterday when the U.S. Agriculture Department announced that the Soviets had bought 1.2 million metric tons of U.S. corn , bringing their U.S. corn purchases confirmed so far this month to about five million metric tons . 
In trading at the Chicago Board of Trade , the corn contract for December delivery jumped 5.75 cents a bushel to settle at $ 2.44 a bushel . 
The Soviet purchases are close to exceeding what some analysts had expected the Soviet Union to buy this fall , the season in which it usually buys much of the corn it imports from the U.S. . 
That pace is causing some analysts to speculate that the Soviet Union might soon purchase as much as another two million metric tons . 
One sign that more Soviet purchases are possible is that U.S. grain companies yesterday bought an unusually large amount of corn futures contracts . 
That sometimes signals that they are laying plans to export corn . 
By some estimates , several grain companies combined bought contracts for the possession of roughly one million metric tons of corn . 
By buying futures contracts , these companies attempt to protect themselves from swings in the price of the corn that they are obligated to deliver . 
Rumors of Soviet interest also pushed up the prices of soybean futures contracts . 
Among other things , the Agriculture Department is widely thought to be mulling whether to subsidize the sale of soybean oil to the Soviet Union . 
On top of all this , corn and soybean prices rose on reports that the Midwest harvest was disrupted by a freakishly early snow storm that dumped several inches in parts of Indiana and Ohio . 
The harvest delays , however , are expected to be temporary . 
Balmy temperatures are forecast for next week , said Robert Lekberg , an analyst at Farmers Grain & Livestock Corp. , Chicago . 
Many farmers used the jump in prices to sell their recently harvested crop to grain elevator companies . 
The heavy selling by farmers helped to damp the price rally . 
Wheat futures prices rose slightly . 
In other commodity markets yesterday : 
PRECIOUS METALS : 
Futures prices declined . 
A number of developments were negatively interpreted by traders . 
December delivery gold fell $ 1.80 an ounce to $ 370.60 . 
December silver eased 2.7 cents an ounce to $ 5.133 . 
January platinum was down $ 3.60 an ounce at $ 491.10 . 
One price-depressing development was the lower-than-expected increase of only 0.2 % in the consumer price index for September , an analyst said . 
He noted that the `` core inflation rate , '' which excludes food and energy , was also low at 0.2 % . 
Other news that weighed on the market : Initial unemployment claims rose by 62,000 last week ; American Telephone & Telegraph Co. will reduce its managerial staff by 15,000 through attrition ; the oil market turned weaker ; there was n't any investor demand for bullion ; and the dollar strengthened during the day , putting pressure on gold . 
Also , the analyst said , economic circumstances are such that both South Africa and the Soviet Union , the principal gold and platinum producers , are being forced to continue selling the metals . 
Both are in great need of foreign exchange , and South Africa is also under pressure to meet foreign loan commitments , he said . 
`` Putting it all together , we have a negative scenario that does n't look like it will improve overnight , '' he said . 
COPPER : 
Futures prices recovered in quiet trading . 
The December contract rose 1.50 cents a pound to $ 1.2795 . 
That contract fell a total of 5.75 cents during the first three days of this week , mostly in reaction to last Friday 's stock market plunge , which prompted concern that it might signal a similar sharp slowing of the U.S. economy and thus reduced demand for copper , a leading industrial metal . 
In recent days , however , there has been increased purchasing of copper in London , an analyst said . 
Some of this buying was by Japan , which has had its supplies sharply reduced by long production stoppages at the Bougainville mine in Papua New Guinea , Highland Valley mine in British Columbia , and the Cananea mine in Mexico , which are major shippers to Japan . 
The increasing likelihood that Cananea and Highland Valley will soon return to production may have cut some of that purchasing , but even if any of these mines begin operating soon , their output wo n't be significant until at least the end of the year , analysts note . 
So , one analyst said , even though the long-term production problems may be easing , there will still be a significant need for copper over the next three months , when inventories will remain relatively low . 
ENERGY : 
Crude oil prices ended mixed . 
West Texas Intermediate for November delivery fell 14 cents a barrel to $ 20.42 . 
But so-called outer month contracts finished higher . 
For instance , December contracts for WTI rose 17 cents to $ 20.42 . 
Most energy futures opened lower , following Wednesday 's market downturn . 
But a flurry of late trading yesterday beefed up prices . 
Heating oil and gasoline futures ended higher as well . 
Melvin Belli 's San Francisco law offices may have been the epicenter of legal activity after Tuesday 's earthquake . 
In the first 25 minutes after his office 's telephone service was restored yesterday morning , 17 potential clients had called seeking the services of the self-proclaimed King of Torts . 
Mr. Belli , like many other personal-injury lawyers , suspects that the earthquake , which measured 6.9 on the Richter scale , will generate enough lawsuits to keep this city 's personal-injury and construction lawyers busy for quite some time . 
Suits are likely to be filed against engineering firms , contractors and developers , as well as against local-government agencies . 
But lawyers looking to cash in on the quake may have a tough time once their cases reach a judge . 
Experts on California tort law say protections afforded government agencies in such cases are pretty ironclad . 
Even claims against individuals and companies face significant roadblocks . 
The major legal barrier is the principle that no one can be held liable for an `` act of God . '' 
For now , says Laurence Drivon , president-elect of the 6,000-member California Trial Lawyers Association , `` the last thing we really need to worry about is whether anybody is going to get sued , or whether they have liability or not . 
We still have people wandering around in a daze in San Francisco worrying about whether it 's going to rain tonight . '' 
But that wo n't stop plaintiffs ' lawyers from seeking a little room for maneuvering . 
In San Francisco , they argue , an earthquake was a near certainty . 
Therefore , engineering firms , construction contractors and developers can be sued for not keeping structures up to standard , and government agencies can be held accountable for failing to properly protect citizens from such a foreseeable disaster , if negligence can be proven . 
`` My prediction is there will be mass litigation over errors and omissions in engineering and contracting , '' says Stanley Chesley , a well-known Cincinnati plaintiffs lawyer . 
From what he saw on television , Mr. Chesley points out that Interstate 880 , which collapsed and killed more than 200 commuters , suffered serious damage while surrounding buildings appeared to sustain no damage whatsoever . 
He adds that `` they were aware of the propensity for earthquakes and the San Andreas Fault . '' 
The flamboyant and publicity-conscious Mr. Belli says he already has investigators looking into who could be held liable for the damage on the Bay Bridge and the interstate approaching it . 
`` We wo n't know until the smoke clears -- but yes , we 're looking into it , '' he says . 
Mr. Belli says he wants to know whether state or federal engineers or private companies could have prevented the damage . 
Mr. Belli , who was at Candlestick Park for the World Series Tuesday night , says he has hired civil engineers to check out his own mildly damaged building and to investigate the bridge collapse . 
Defense lawyers , perhaps understandably , say that plaintiffs ' lawyers taking such an approach will have little success in pursuing their claims , though they add that the facts of each case must be looked at individually . 
`` A lot of this is going to be code-related , '' says Ignazio J. Ruvolo , a construction law specialist at Bronson , Bronson & McKinnon , a San Francisco law firm . 
Plaintiffs , he says , will argue that damaged structures were n't built to proper design standards . 
But if defendants can prove that they met San Francisco 's stringent building codes , `` that 's probably going to protect them , '' Mr. Ruvolo says . 
Government entities , continues Mr. Ruvolo , could be protected by the California Government Tort Liability Act . 
Under the statute , agencies are provided `` defenses that normally are n't available in the private sector , '' Mr. Ruvolo says . 
`` The legislature does not want to inhibit the unique government activities by exposing public entities to liability . '' 
Built into the statute are so-called design immunities , which are likely to protect government agencies , according to Mr. Ruvolo and Richard Covert , a lawyer with the California Department of Transportation , which oversees the damaged Bay Bridge . 
The state is protected when plans and designs for public structures were approved ahead of time or when structures met previously approved standards , says Mr. Covert . 
He believes those defenses might well apply to the Bay Bridge collapse . 
Nevertheless , he adds , `` I would n't get totally shocked if we get lawsuits out of the Bay Bridge . '' 
If there 's going to be a race to the courthouse , it has n't started yet . 
Mr. Covert had to search through law books scattered on the floor of his office yesterday , and Mr. Belli 's courtyard was strewn with bricks . 
Wednesday , Mr. Belli 's staff was n't permitted into his office by city officials worried about their safety . 
He said he set up shop on the sidewalk in front of his town-house office and helped victims apply for federal aid -- free of charge . 
In a news release issued by Mr. Drivon , the trial lawyers association also promised free assistance to victims . 
The association said it would monitor the conduct of lawyers and warned that solicitation of business is unethical . 
What 's in a name ? 
Apparently a lot , according to the British firm of Deloitte , Haskins & Sells . 
The British firm has begun court proceedings in London to prevent the use of the name `` Deloitte '' by Deloitte , Haskins & Sells and Touche Ross & Co. in England and the rest of the world . 
The British Deloitte firm recently withdrew from the merger of Deloitte and Touche world-wide and joined Coopers & Lybrand . 
John Bullock , senior partner of Deloitte in the U.K. , said `` the decision to start these proceedings has n't been taken lightly . '' 
Mr. Bullock said the British firm has used the name `` Deloitte '' since 1845 . 
In the U.S. , Deloitte , Haskins & Sells was known as Haskins & Sells until 1978 , when it added the `` Deloitte '' name of its British affiliate . 
John C. Burton , an accounting professor at Columbia University 's Graduate School of Business , said `` there 's a lot of emotion involved in the name of an accounting firm with a long history and with roots in England , where accounting predates the U.S. . '' 
Although accountants are n't noted as `` being deeply emotional , they really hold it all in , '' said Mr. Burton , former chief accountant of the Securities and Exchange Commission . 
J. Michael Cook , chairman of Deloitte , Haskins & Sells International , said he believes the legal action by the British firm `` to be without merit . '' 
Mr. Cook said that last June , the international executive committes of Deloitte and Touche agreed to a world-wide merger . 
`` The merger is proceeding according to plan , except as to the withdrawal of the Deloitte U.K. firm , '' he said . 
Partners at other accounting firms say that the Deloitte firm in the U.K. is filing the suit to get even with the merged Deloitte-Touche firm for keeping major auditing work in England . 
General Motors Corp. , a Deloitte audit client , for example , has agreed to keep its annual $ 18 million world-wide audit and associated tax work with the merged Deloitte-Touche firm , to be known as Deloitte & Touche in the U.S. . 
In England , this would mean that the British Deloitte would lose revenue for its audit of GM 's Vauxhill unit . 
The defection of Deloitte 's affiliates in Britain and the Netherlands to Coopers & Lybrand will make Coopers one of the biggest accounting firms in Europe , rivaling KPMG Peat Marwick there . 
Although Coopers has n't been courted by other major accounting firms for a merger , it is benefiting greatly from fallout from the Deloitte-Touche merger . 
In New York , Harris Amhowitz , general counsel of Coopers , said Coopers `` was aware of the litigation , '' but he declined further comment . 
He also declined to comment on the name that Coopers would use in England if Deloitte UK won its litigation to keep its name . 
Coopers uses the Coopers & Lybrand name world-wide . 
William Bennett , the White House drug-policy director , accused local officials in the Washington area of blocking construction of prison facilities to house convicted drug dealers . 
`` Politics has essentially put up a roadblock '' to finding sites for new federal prisons , Mr. Bennett said at a news conference called to report on his `` emergency assistance program '' for the capital . 
Without more space to incarcerate convicted criminals , he added , `` we will not win the war on drugs . '' 
Mr. Bennett declared in April that he would make Washington a `` test case '' for how the Bush administration would aid cities afflicted by heavy drug trafficking and violence . 
The drug czar claimed that enforcement efforts are working here , `` albeit at a slower and more halting pace than we would like . '' 
He acknowledged , however , that Washington 's `` drug-related murder rate is intolerably high . 
The prisons are too crowded . 
Drugs continue to be sold openly around schools , parks and housing projects . '' 
Mr. Bennett declined to name the area officials who he believes have impeded plans for building more federal prisons to ease Washington 's problem . 
But other Bush administration officials have criticized Maryland Gov. William Schaefer for blocking the use of possible sites in that state . 
Administration officials also have said that Washington Mayor Marion Barry has delayed consideration of sites in the city . 
In a letter to Mr. Bennett 's office , released yesterday , Washington 's city administrator , Carol Thompson , complained that the drug czar had exaggerated the amount of federal drug-related assistance provided to the capital . 
Referring to Mr. Bennett 's claim that the federal government would provide $ 97 million in emergency federal support , Ms. Thompson wrote , `` Our analysis was unable to even come close to documenting that figure . '' 
Of his successes in Washington , Mr. Bennett stressed that existing federal prisons have taken custody of 375 local inmates . 
He also noted that the federal Drug Enforcement Administration has established a federal-local task force responsible since April for 106 arrests and more than $ 2 million in seizures of drug dealers ' assets . 
The Defense Department has lent the Washington U.S. attorney 10 prosecutors , and the Federal Bureau of Investigation has provided crime laboratory facilities and training , he added . 
What if it happened to us ? 
In the wake of the earthquake in California and the devastation of Hurricane Hugo , many companies in disaster-prone areas are pondering the question of preparedness . 
Some , particularly in West Coast earthquake zones , are dusting off their evacuation plans , checking food stocks and reminding employees of what to do if emergency strikes . 
Others say they feel confident that steps they 've already taken would see them through a disaster . 
Preparedness involves more than flashlights and fire alarms these days . 
Some big companies have teams of in-house experts focusing on safety and business resumption . 
Many companies in the path of potential disaster have set up contingency offices in safe regions , hoping they can transport employees there and resume operations quickly . 
That means making sure that copies of vital computer software and company records are out of harm 's way . 
Some businesses -- like Disneyland -- claim that even if they became isolated in a crisis , they would be able to feed and care for their people for as long as five days . 
`` Self-sufficiency has to be the cornerstone of your plan , '' says Stephanie Masaki-Schatz , manager of corporate emergency planning at Atlantic Richfield Co. in Los Angeles . 
`` If you do n't save your critical people , you wo n't be able to bring up your vital business functions . '' 
Although ARCO 's head office , more than 300 miles from the epicenter , was n't affected by this week 's tremors , Ms. Masaki-Schatz used the occasion to distribute a three-page memo of `` Earthquake Tips '' to 1,200 ARCO employees . 
`` You need to capitalize on these moments when you have everyone 's attention , '' she says . 
`` It was a good reminder that we all need to prepare prior to an event . '' 
The ARCO memo urges employees to keep certain supplies at work , such as solid shoes and `` heavy gloves to clear debris . '' 
It also recommends that employees be aware of everyday office items that could be used for emergency care or shelter . 
Among the suggestions : Pantyhose and men 's ties could be used for slings , while removable wooden shelves might aid in `` breaking through office walls . '' 
ARCO maintains an office in Dallas that would take over if payroll operations in Pasadena were disrupted . 
Two months ago the company set up a toll-free number , based outside California , to handle queries from employees about when they should report back to work after an earthquake or other disaster . 
The ARCO plan takes into account such details as which aspects of business are busier at certain times of the year . 
This way , depending on when a quake might strike , priorities can be assigned to departments that should be brought back on line first . 
At Hewlett-Packard Co. , the earthquake came just as the company was reviewing its own emergency procedures . 
`` We were talking about scheduling a practice drill for November , '' says Joan Tharp , a spokeswoman . 
`` Then we had a real one in the afternoon . '' 
The Palo Alto , Calif. , computer maker scrambled to set up a special phone line to tell manufacturing and support staff to stay home Wednesday . 
Sales and service employees were asked to report to work to help Bay area clients who called with computer problems . 
Hewlett-Packard also called in its systems experts to restore its own computer operations . 
`` That means we can accept orders '' and begin getting back to normal , says Ms. Tharp . 
Prompted by an earlier California earthquake , as well as a fire in a Los Angeles office tower , Great Western Bank in the past year hired three emergency planners and spent $ 75,000 equipping a trailer with communications gear to serve as an emergency headquarters . 
Although officials of the savings and loan , a unit of Great Western Financial Corp. , used some of their new plans and equipment during this week 's quake , they still lost touch for more than 24 hours with 15 branches in the affected areas , not knowing if employees were injured or vaults were broken open . 
`` Some people flat out did n't know what to do , '' says Robert G. Lee , vice president for emergency planning and corporate security at Great Western . 
As it turned out , bank employees were n't hurt and the vaults withstood the jolts . 
Still , says Mr. Lee : `` We need to educate people that they need to get to a phone somehow , some way , to let someone know what their status is . '' 
Some companies are confident that they 're prepared . 
Occidental Petroleum Corp. holds regular evacuation drills and stocks food , oxygen and non-prescription drugs at checkpoints in its 16-story headquarters . 
The company also maintains rechargeable flashlights in offices and changes its standby supply of drinking water every three months . 
`` We feel we are doing everything we can , '' an Occidental spokesman says . 
Walt Disney Co. 's Disneyland in Anaheim , Calif. , stocks rescue equipment , medical supplies , and enough food and water to feed at least 10,000 visitors for as long as five days in the event that a calamity isolates the theme park . 
The park also has emergency centers where specially trained employees would go to coordinate evacuation and rescue plans using walkie-talkies , cellular phones , and a public-address system . 
The centers are complete with maps detailing utility lines beneath rides and `` safe havens '' where people can be assembled away from major structures . 
Vista Chemical Co. , with three chemical plants in and near Lake Charles , La. , `` prepares for every hurricane that enters the Gulf of Mexico , '' says Keith L. Fogg , a company safety director . 
Hurricane Hugo , an Atlantic storm , did n't affect Vista . 
But two other major storms have threatened operations so far this year , most recently Hurricane Jerry this week . 
Because hurricanes can change course rapidly , the company sends employees home and shuts down operations in stages -- the closer a storm gets , the more complete the shutdown . 
The company does n't wait until the final hours to get ready for hurricanes . 
`` There are just tons of things that have to be considered , '' Mr. Fogg says . 
`` Empty tank cars will float away on you if you get a big tidal surge . '' 
Still , Vista officials realize they 're relatively fortunate . 
`` With a hurricane you know it 's coming . 
You have time to put precautionary mechanisms in place , '' notes a Vista spokeswoman . 
`` A situation like San Francisco is so frightening because there 's no warning . 
Former Democratic fund-raiser Thomas M. Gaubert , whose savings and loan was wrested from his control by federal thrift regulators , has been granted court permission to sue the regulators . 
In a ruling by the Fifth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans , Mr. Gaubert received the go-ahead to pursue a claim against the Federal Home Loan Bank Board and the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas for losses he suffered when the Bank Board closed the Independent American Savings Association of Irving , Texas . 
Mr. Gaubert , who was chairman and the majority stockholder of Independent American , had relinquished his control in exchange for federal regulators ' agreement to drop their inquiry into his activities at another savings and loan . 
As part of the agreement , Mr. Gaubert contributed real estate valued at $ 25 million to the assets of Independent American . 
While under the control of federal regulators , Independent American 's net worth dropped from $ 75 million to a negative $ 400 million , wiping out the value of Mr. Gaubert 's real estate contribution and his stock in the institution . 
Mr. Gaubert 's suit to recover his damages was dismissed last year by U.S. District Judge Robert Maloney of Dallas under the Federal Tort Claims Act , which offers broad protection for actions by federal agencies and employees . 
Earlier this week , a Fifth Circuit appellate panel upheld Judge Maloney 's dismissal of Mr. Gaubert 's claim as a shareholder but said the judge should reconsider Mr. Gaubert 's claim for the loss of his property . 
`` It may depend on whether there was an express or implied promise ... that the federal officials would not negligently cause the deterioration '' of Independent American , the court wrote . 
Mr. Gaubert 's lawyer , Abbe David Lowell of Washington , D.C. , says the impact of the ruling on other cases involving thrift takeovers will depend on the degree of similarity in the facts . 
`` I do n't know if this will affect one institution or a hundred , '' Mr. Lowell says . 
`` It does establish a very clear precedent for suing the FHLBB where there was none before . '' 
MAITRE'D CLAIMS in suit that restaurant fired her because she was pregnant . 
In a suit filed in state court in Manhattan , the American Civil Liberties Union is representing the former maitre 'd of the chic Odeon restaurant . 
The suit , which seeks compensatory and punitive damages of $ 1 million , alleges that the firing of Marcia Trees Levine violated New York state 's human-rights law . 
Among other things , the law prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex and pregnancy . 
The suit alleges that Ms. Levine was fired after she refused to accept a lower paying , less visible job upon reaching her sixth month of pregnancy . 
Ms. Levine told her employer that she was pregnant in February ; a month later , the suit says , the restaurant manager told Ms. Levine that she would be demoted to his assistant because he felt customers would be uncomfortable with a pregnant maitre 'd . 
Kary Moss , an attorney with the ACLU 's Women 's Rights Project , said , `` They wanted a svelte-looking woman , and a pregnant woman is not svelte . 
They told her , ` We do n't hire fat people and we do n't hire cripples . 
And pregnant women are fat . ' '' 
Ms. Moss said Ms. Levine secretly taped many conversations with her bosses at the Odeon in which they told her she was being fired as maitre 'd because she was pregnant . 
Paul H. Aloe , an attorney for Odeon owner Keith McNally , denied the allegations . 
He said Ms. Levine had never been fired , although she had stopped working at the restaurant . 
`` The Odeon made a written offer to Marcia Levine on July 10 to return to work as the maitre 'd , at the same pay , same hours and with back pay accrued , '' he said . 
Mr. Aloe said the Odeon `` has no policy against hiring pregnant people . '' 
LAWYERS IN Texas 's biggest bank-fraud case want out in face of retrial . 
Lawyers representing five of the seven defendants in the case say their clients can no longer afford their services . 
The trial of the case lasted seven months and ended in September with a hung jury . 
The defendants were indicted two years ago on charges that they conspired to defraud five thrifts of more than $ 130 million through a complicated scheme to inflate the price of land and condominium construction along Interstate 30 , east of Dallas . 
The defense lawyers , three of whom are solo practitioners , say they ca n't afford to put their law practices on hold for another seven-month trial . 
Some of the lawyers say they would continue to represent their clients if the government pays their tab as court-appointed lawyers . 
Assistant U.S. Attorney Terry Hart of Dallas says the government will oppose any efforts to bring in a new defense team because it would delay a retrial . 
FEDERAL JUDGE ALCEE HASTINGS of Florida , facing impeachment , received an unanticipated boost yesterday . 
Sen. Arlen Specter ( R. , Pa . ) urged acquittal of the judge in a brief circulated to his Senate colleagues during closed-door deliberations . 
Among other things , the brief cited insufficient evidence . 
Sen. Specter was vice chairman of the impeachment trial committee that heard evidence in the Hastings case last summer . 
A former prosecutor and member of the Senate Judiciary Committee , Sen. Specter is expected to exercise influence when the Senate votes on the impeachment today . 
RICHMOND RESIGNATIONS : 
Six partners in the Richmond , Va. , firm of Browder , Russell , Morris & Butcher announced they are resigning . 
Five of the partners -- James W. Morris , Philip B. Morris , Robert M. White , Ann Adams Webster and Jacqueline G. Epps -- are opening a boutique in Richmond to concentrate on corporate defense litigation , particularly in product liability cases . 
The sixth partner , John H. OBrion , Jr. , is joining Cowan & Owen , a smaller firm outside Richmond . 
LAW FIRM NOTES : 
Nixon , Hargrave , Devans & Doyle , based in Rochester , N.Y. , has opened an office in Buffalo , N.Y ... . 
Mayer , Brown & Platt , Chicago , added two partners to its Houston office , Eddy J. Roger Jr. , and Jeff C. Dodd ... . 
Copyright specialist Neil Boorstyn , who writes the monthly Copyright Law Journal newsletter , is joining McCutchen , Doyle , Brown & Enersen . 
New York Times Co. 's third-quarter earnings report is reinforcing analysts ' belief that newspaper publishers will be facing continued poor earnings comparisons through 1990 . 
The publisher was able to register soaring quarter net income because of a onetime gain on the sale of its cable-TV system . 
However , operating profit fell 35 % to $ 16.4 million . 
The decline reflected the expense of buying three magazines , lower earnings from the forest-products group , and what is proving to be a nagging major problem , continued declines in advertising linage at the New York Times , the company 's flagship daily newspaper . 
In composite trading on the American Stock Exchange , New York Times closed at $ 28.125 a share , down 37.5 cents . 
Analysts said the company 's troubles mirror those of the industry . 
Retail advertising , which often represents half of the advertising volume at most daily newspapers , largely is n't rebounding in the second half from extended doldrums as expected . 
At the same time , newspapers are bedeviled by lagging national advertising , especially in its financial component . 
Dow Jones & Co. recently reported net fell 9.9 % , a reflection , in part , of continued softness in financial advertising at The Wall Street Journal and Barron 's magazine . 
`` We expect next year to be a fairly soft year in newspaper-industry advertising , '' said John Morton , an analyst for Lynch , Jones & Ryan . 
`` Next year , earnings will hold steady , but we just do n't see a big turnaround in the trend in advertising . '' 
John S. Reidy , an analyst for Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. , said , `` The Times faces the same problem of other publishers : linage is down . 
It will be hard to do handstands until real linage starts heading back up . '' 
In the quarterly report , Arthur Ochs Sulzberger , New York Times Co. chairman and chief executive officer , said negative factors affecting third-quarter earnings will continue . 
Analysts agreed with company expectations that operating profit will be down this year and in 1990 . 
Mr. Sulzberger said the scheduled opening of a new color-printing plant in Edison , N.J. , in 1990 would involve heavy startup and depreciation costs . 
`` With the Edison plant coming on line next summer , the Times is facing some tough earnings comparison in the future , '' said Peter Appert , an analyst with C.J. Lawrence , Morgan Grenfell . 
`` But many newspapers are facing similar comparisons . '' 
The sale of the company 's cable franchise brought an after-tax gain of $ 193.3 million , part of which will be used to reduce debt . 
The company also has a stock-repurchase plan . 
Analysts said they were impressed by the performance of the company 's newspaper group , which consists of the Times , 35 regional newspapers and a one-third interest in the International Herald Tribune ; group operating profit for the quarter increased slightly to $ 34.9 million from $ 34.5 million on flat revenue . 
Drexel Burnham 's Mr. Reidy pointed out that `` profits held up in a tough revenue environment . 
That 's a good sign when profits are stable during a time revenue is in the trough . 
Investors celebrated the second anniversary of Black Monday with a buying spree in both stocks and bonds . 
But the dollar was mixed . 
Stock and bond investors were cheered by last month 's encouragingly low inflation rate . 
This news raised hopes for further interest-rate cuts . 
Treasury-bond prices immediately rallied , setting the stock market rolling from the opening bell . 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average , up about 60 points in mid-afternoon , finished with a gain of 39.55 points , to 2683.20 . 
That brought the average 's cumulative gain this week to about 114 points . 
Since the 1987 crash , the industrials have soared more than 54 % , and the widely watched market barometer is about 4 % below its record high set earlier this month . 
The stock-market rally was led by blue-chip issues , but , unlike Monday 's rebound , was broadly based . 
Indeed , over-the-counter stocks , led by technology issues , outleaped the industrial average . 
The Nasdaq Composite Index soared 7.52 , or 1.6 % , to 470.80 , its highest one-day jump in points this year . 
Many takeover-related stocks rose after news that a group obtained financing commitments for the proposed buy-out of American Medical International Inc . 
Among the biggest winners were brokerage-house stocks , responding to heavy trading volume . 
The government said consumer prices rose only 0.2 % last month . 
Economists expected twice as large an increase . 
That news , plus recent signs of economic sluggishness , greatly increases pressure on the Federal Reserve to ease credit further , which in turn would be good news for stocks , investment managers say . 
`` I see a lot of evidence indicating a slower economy , and that means my interest-rate outlook has a downward tilt , '' said Garnett L. Keith Jr. , vice chairman of Prudential Insurance Co. of America , one of the nation 's largest institutional investors . 
Fed officials probably wo n't drive down rates immediately , Mr. Keith said . 
Despite the inflation news , several Fed officials still fear consumer-price pressures will intensify because they insist the economy is stronger than generally believed . 
But Wall Street analysts expect further signs of economic weakness in government reports during the next few weeks . 
If so , that will cinch the case for another shot of credit-easing within a month or so . 
That , in turn , is expected to persuade banks to cut their prime lending rate , a benchmark rate on many corporate and consumer loans , by half a percentage point , to 10 % . 
`` We 're not out of the woods yet by any means , '' said George R. Mateyo , president and chief executive of Carnegie Capital Management Co. , Cleveland . 
But the economy `` is slowing enough to give the Federal Reserve leeway to reduce interest rates . '' 
But many individual investors are leery about stocks because of fresh signs of fragility in the huge junk-bond market . 
Investors also are anxious about today 's `` witching hour , '' the monthly expiration of stock-index futures and options , and options on individual stocks . 
This phenomenon often makes stock prices swing wildly at the end of the trading session . 
In major market activity : Stock prices surged in heavy trading . 
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange rose to 198.1 million shares from 166.9 million Wednesday . 
Gaining Big Board issues outnumbered decliners by 1,235 to 355 . 
The dollar was mixed . 
In New York late yesterday , it was at 141.70 yen , up from 141.45 yen late Wednesday . 
But it fell to 1.8470 marks from 1.8485 . 
Tuesday 's rout of a GOP congressional hopeful in a Mississippi district that has n't backed a Democratic presidential candidate since Adlai Stevenson is another reminder that , at least at the federal level , political `` ticket splitting '' has been on the rise over the past half century . 
In only one presidential election year prior to 1948 did more than 20 % of the nation 's congressional districts choose a different party 's candidate for the White House than for the House of Representatives . 
Now that percentage routinely equals a third and twice has been above 40 % . 
As we know , voters tend to favor Republicans more in races for president than in those for Congress . 
In every presidential election over the past half century , except for the Goldwater presidential candidacy , the GOP has captured a greater percentage of the major-party popular vote for president than it has of congressional seats or the popular vote for Congress . 
Prior to 1932 , the pattern was nearly the opposite . 
What accounts for the results of recent decades ? 
A simple economic theory may provide at least a partial explanation for the split personality displayed by Americans in the voting booth . 
The theory relies on three assumptions : 
1 ) Voters can `` buy '' one of two brands when they select their political agents -- a Republican brand that believes in the minimalist state and in the virtues of private markets over the vices of public action , and a Democratic brand that believes in big government and in public intervention to remedy the excesses attendant to the pursuit of private interest . 
2 ) Congressional representatives have two basic responsibilities while voting in office -- dealing with national issues ( programmatic actions such as casting roll call votes on legislation that imposes costs and / or confers benefits on the population at large ) and attending to local issues ( constituency service and pork barrel ) . 
3 ) Republican congressional representatives , because of their belief in a minimalist state , are less willing to engage in local benefit-seeking than are Democratic members of Congress . 
If these assumptions hold , voters in races for Congress face what in economic theory is called a prisoner 's dilemma and have an incentive , at the margin , to lean Democratic . 
If they put a Republican into office , not only will they acquire less in terms of local benefits but their selected legislator will be relatively powerless to prevent other legislators from `` bringing home the bacon '' to their respective constituencies . 
Each legislator , after all , is only one out of 535 when it comes to national policy making . 
In races for the White House , a voter 's incentive , at the margin , is to lean Republican . 
Although a GOP president may limit local benefits to the voter 's particular district / state , such a president is also likely to be more effective at preventing other districts / states and their legislators from bringing home the local benefits . 
The individual voter 's standing consequently will be enhanced through lower taxes . 
While this theory is exceedingly simple , it appears to explain several things . 
First , why ticket splitting has increased and taken the peculiar pattern that it has over the past half century : Prior to the election of Franklin Roosevelt as president and the advent of the New Deal , government occupied a much smaller role in society and the prisoner 's dilemma problem confronting voters in races for Congress was considerably less severe . 
Second , it explains why voters hold Congress in disdain but generally love their own congressional representatives : Any individual legislator 's constituents appreciate the specific benefits that the legislator wins for them but not the overall cost associated with every other legislator doing likewise for his own constituency . 
Third , the theory suggests why legislators who pay too much attention to national policy making relative to local benefit-seeking have lower security in office . 
For example , first-term members of the House , once the most vulnerable of incumbents , have become virtually immune to defeat . 
The one exception to this recent trend was the defeat of 13 of the 52 freshman Republicans brought into office in 1980 by the Reagan revolution and running for re-election in 1982 . 
Because these freshmen placed far more emphasis on their partisan role -- spreading the Reagan revolution -- in national policy making , they were more vulnerable to defeat . 
Fourth , the theory indicates why the Republican Party may have a difficult time attracting viable candidates for congressional office . 
Potential candidates may be discouraged from running less by the congressional salary than by the prospect of defeat at the hands of a Democratic opponent . 
To the extent that potential Republican candidates and their financial backers realize that the congressional prisoner 's dilemma game works to their disadvantage , the Republican Party will be hindered in its attempts to field a competitive slate of congressional candidates . 
Fifth , the theory may provide at least a partial reason for why ticket splitting has been particularly pronounced in the South . 
To the extent that Democratic legislators from the South have held a disproportionate share of power in Congress since 1932 and have been able to translate such clout into relatively more local benefits for their respective constituencies , voters in the South have had an especially strong incentive to keep such Democrats in office . 
Finally , the theory suggests why Republicans generally have fared better in Senate races than in campaigns for the House . 
Since local benefit-seeking matters more and national policy making matters less in the lower chamber of Congress , this is precisely the pattern one would expect if Republicans are less willing to engage in local benefit-seeking than their Democratic counterparts . 
Is there any empirical support for this theory ? 
Three pieces of evidence corroborate the key assumption that Democratic legislators are more willing to engage in local benefit-seeking than their Republican colleagues . 
First , economists James Bennett and Thomas DiLorenzo find that GOP senators turn back roughly 10 % more of their allocated personal staff budgets than Democrats do . 
To the extent that the primary duty of personal staff involves local benefit-seeking , this indicates that political philosophy leads congressional Republicans to pay less attention to narrow constituent concerns . 
Second , if the key assumption is valid , Democrats should have lower attendance rates on roll-call votes than Republicans do to the extent that such votes reflect national policy making and that participating in such votes takes away from the time a legislator could otherwise devote to local benefit-seeking . 
This is indeed what the data indicate , particularly in the case of the House . 
The Democratic House attendance rate has not exceeded the Republican House attendance rate since 1959 . 
Finally , as shown in the table , Democrats allocate a higher proportion of their personal staffs to district offices -- where local benefit-seeking duties matter more and national policy making activities matter less relative to Washington offices . 
An examination of changes in personal staffing decisions in the Senate between 1986 and 1987 ( when control of that body changed party hands ) , moreover , reveals that the personal staffing differences noted in the table can not be attributed to the disproportionate control Democrats exercise , due to their majority-party status , over other resources such as committee staff . 
An additional piece of evidence from the Senate : Holding other factors constant , such as incumbency advantages and regional factors , the difference between popular votes for Republican presidential and senatorial candidates in states conducting a Senate election turns out to be a positive function of how onerous the federal government 's tax burden is per state ( a progressive tax rate hits higher-income states harder ) . 
Put more simply , GOP candidates for president are looked on more kindly by voters than Republican candidates for the Senate when the prisoner 's dilemma is more severe . 
Moreover , ticket splitting appears to take the same peculiar pattern at the state government level as it does at the federal level . 
State government is more typically split along Republican-governor / Democratic-legislature lines than the reverse . 
A cross-state econometric investigation , furthermore , reveals that , holding other factors constant , the difference between a state 's major-party vote going to the Republican gubernatorial candidate and the Republican share of the lower state house is a positive function of the state tax rate . 
In sum , at both the federal and state government levels at least part of the seemingly irrational behavior voters display in the voting booth may have an exceedingly rational explanation . 
Mr. Zupan teaches at the University of Southern California 's business school . 
A House-Senate conference approved a nearly $ 17 billion State , Justice and Commerce Department bill that makes federal reparations for Japanese-Americans held in World War II internment camps a legal entitlement after next Oct. 1 . 
The measure provides no money for the promised payments until then , but beginning in fiscal 1991 , the government would be committed to meeting annual payments of as much as $ 500 million until the total liability of approximately $ 1.25 billion is paid . 
The action abandons earlier efforts to find offsetting cuts to fund the payments , but is widely seen as a more realistic means of expediting reparations first authorized in 1988 . 
The action came as Congress sent to President Bush a fiscal 1990 bill providing an estimated $ 156.7 billion for the Departments of Labor , Education , Health and Human Services . 
Final approval was on a 67-31 roll call in the Senate , which sets the stage for a veto confrontation with Mr. Bush over the issue of publicly financed abortions for poor women . 
Reversing an eight-year federal policy , the measure supports Medicaid abortions in cases of rape and incest , but Mr. Bush has so far refused to support any specific exemption beyond instances in which the mother 's life is in danger . 
Mr. Bush 's veto power puts him a commanding position in the narrowly divided House , but a vote to override his position could well pick up new support because of the wealth of health and education programs financed in the underlying bill . 
The measure before the conference yesterday funds the Departments of State , Justice and Commerce through fiscal 1990 . 
An estimated $ 1.32 billion is provided for next year 's census , and negotiators stripped a Senate-passed rider seeking to block the counting of illegal aliens . 
Elsewhere in the Commerce Department , nearly $ 191.2 million is preserved for assistance programs under the Economic Development Administration . 
And in a footnote to the fall of House Speaker James Wright this year , the conference voted to rescind $ 11.8 million in unspent EDA funds for a Fort Worth , Texas , stockyards project that figured in ethics charges against the former Democratic leader . 
Fiscal pressures also forced the adoption of new fees charged by federal agencies , and an 18 % increase in the Securities and Exchange Commission 's budget would be financed entirely by an added $ 26 million in filing fees . 
In an unprecedented step , the measure anticipates another $ 30 million in receipts by having the Federal Bureau of Investigation charge for fingerprint services in civil cases -- a change that is almost certain to increase Pentagon costs in processing personnel and security clearances . 
The bill does n't include an estimated $ 1.9 billion in supplemental anti-drug funds for Justice Department and law-enforcement accounts that are still in conference with the House . 
But yesterday 's agreement would make it easier for state governments to handle the promised aid by deferring for one year a scheduled 50 % increase in the required state matching funds for law-enforcement grants . 
Similarly , the measure adjusts the current funding formula to promise smaller states such as New Hampshire and Delaware a minimum allocation of $ 1.6 million each in drug grants , or three times the current minimum . 
The odd mix of departments in the bill makes it one of the more eclectic of the annual appropriations measures , and the assorted provisions attached by lawmakers run from $ 1.5 million for a fish farm in Arkansas to a music festival in Moscow under the United States Information Agency . 
Lawmakers scrapped all of a $ 7.4 million State Department request for the 1992 Expo in Seville , Spain , but agreed elsewhere to $ 15,000 for an oil portrait of former Chief Justice Warren Burger . 
Senate Commerce Committee Chairman Ernest Hollings ( D. , S.C. ) , who also chairs the Senate appropriations subcommittee for the department , attached $ 10 million for an advanced technology initiative , including work on high-definition television . 
His Republican counterpart , Sen. Warren Rudman ( R. , N.H. ) , has used his position to wage a legislative war with the conservative board of the Legal Services Corp . 
An estimated $ 321 million is provided to maintain the program , but Mr. Rudman also succeeded in attaching language seeking to curb the authority of the current board until new members are confirmed . 
The effective date of any new regulations by the current board would be delayed until Oct. 1 next year , and the bill seeks to reverse efforts by the corporation to cut off funds to service organizations such as the Food Research and Action Center . 
The bill also provides $ 620.5 million to meet U.S. contributions to international organizations and $ 80 million for peace-keeping activities . 
Both accounts reflect significant increases from fiscal 1989 , although the amount for peace-keeping shows a 27 % cut from the administration 's request . 
Mercury Savings & Loan Association said it retained Merrill Lynch Capital Markets as its lead investment banker to advise it regarding a possible sale or other combination of the Huntington Beach , Calif. , thrift . 
Mercury , which has assets of more than $ 2 billion and 24 branches in California , said the action to improve its regulatory capital position is related directly to new capital requirements mandated by recently adopted federal legislation . 
Mercury also said it extended its two-year advisory relationship with Montgomery Securities of San Francisco . 
Mercury 's stock closed yesterday at $ 4.875 , unchanged in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
Watching Congress sweat and grimace through its annual budget labors , fighting the urge to spend more , we 're reminded of those late-night movies in which the anguished serial killer turns himself in to police and says , `` Stop me before I kill again . '' 
The Members know they 're doing wrong , but they need help to restrain their darker compulsions . 
Arkansas Democrat David Pryor spilled his guts on the Senate floor the other day after he 'd joined the Finance Committee 's early-morning pork-barrel revels : `` I must tell you ... 
I come to the floor tonight as one who ended up with a busload of extraneous matter . 
It was nothing more or nothing less than a feeding frenzy . '' 
He was turning himself in . 
`` Frankly , as I was walking back to get in my car , I heard many , many people ... opening champagne bottles and celebrating individual victories that some of us had accomplished in getting our little deal in the tax bill and winking at this person for slipping this in , '' he said . 
`` As I was driving home , I did not feel very good about myself . '' 
We can applaud Mr. Pryor 's moment of epiphany , even as we understand that he and his confreres need restraint lest they kill again . 
A good place to start the rehabilitation is a `` legislative line-item veto '' bill now being offered by Indiana Senator Dan Coats . 
The Coats bill , which already has 32 Senate co-sponsors , is n't a pure line-item veto because it would apply only to spending bills . 
Instead it 's a form of `` enhanced rescission , '' giving a President a chance to rescind , or strike , specific spending items that just go too far . 
Under the proposal , a President would have a chance twice each year to return a package of `` rescissions '' to the Hill -- once when he proposes his budget and again after Congress disposes . 
Congress would have 20 days to reject the package with a 50 % majority , but then a President could veto that rejection . 
Congress would then need the usual two-thirds majority to override any veto . 
The proposal would restore some discipline erased from the budget process by the 1974 Budget `` Reform '' Act . 
Before 1974 , a President could `` impound , '' or refuse to spend , funds appropriated by Congress . 
Presidents Kennedy and Johnson were both big users of the impoundment power , but Congress saw its chance against a weakened President Nixon and stripped it away . 
Today a President can still send up spending rescissions , but they 're meaningless unless Congress has a guilty conscience and changes its mind . 
This is like asking foxes to feel remorse about chickens , and naturally rescissions are almost never approved . 
In 1987 , President Reagan sent 73 rescissions back to the Hill , but only 3 % of the spending total was approved by Congress . 
Senator Coats 's proposal would let the proposed spending cuts take place automatically unless Congress acts . 
The Members could still try to serve their constituents with special-interest goodies , but the police ( in the form of a President ) would be there with a straitjacket if they really get crazy , as they do now . 
Mr. Coats plans to offer his proposal as an amendment to a bill to raise the federal debt limit before the end of the month . 
President Bush has endorsed the idea , and at least 50 sitting Senators have voted to support enhanced rescission authority in the past . 
We 're told Senator Pryor is n't yet a co-sponsor , but if he and his colleagues are serious about kicking their compulsions , they 'll sign up . 
Business and civic operations lurched back toward normalcy here as congressional officials estimated that the price tag for emergency assistance to earthquake-ravaged California would total at least $ 2.5 billion . 
`` That is a minimum figure , and I underscore minimum , '' said House Speaker Thomas Foley ( D. , Wash . ) after conferring with California lawmakers . 
`` It 's impossible to put an exact figure on it at this time . '' 
The Office of Management and Budget has begun looking into legislation to provide more funds for earthquake repairs . 
And California 's 45-member delegation in the House is expected to propose that emergency funds be added to a stop-gap spending bill that the House Appropriations Committee is to consider Monday . 
For the most part , major corporations ' headquarters and plants were unaffected or only slightly damaged by Tuesday 's earthquake , which registered 6.9 on the Richter scale . 
One of the last big employers in the Silicon Valley to report in , Seagate Technology , said it expects to be back at full strength Monday . 
The day before the quake , Seagate completed three days of emergency training and drills . 
Echoing the response of almost all big corporations in the Bay Area , Don Waite , Seagate 's chief financial officer , said , `` I would n't expect this to have any significant financial impact . '' 
The city 's recovery from the earthquake was uneven . 
Banks indicated they were operating at greater than 90 % of their usual capacity , but a Nob Hill hotel said tourists had fled , leaving the previously full hotel with an 80 % vacancy rate . 
City crews tallied the wreckage to buildings , but lacked a clear sense of how gravely transportation arteries were disabled . 
Among the city 's banks , Bank of America said all but eight of its 850 branches were open . 
The closed branches , in San Francisco , Hayward , Santa Clara and Santa Cruz , sustained structural damage . 
Power failures kept just seven of its 1,500 automated-teller machines off-line . 
Securities-trading operations were moved to Bank of America 's Concord office , and foreign-exchange trading operations were shifted to Los Angeles , the bank said . 
Wells Fargo & Co. said its Emergency Operations Committee -- which met all night Tuesday -- moved its global-funds transfer system to El Monte , Calif. , 500 miles to the south . 
Only five of 496 branches statewide remain closed , while 23 of 600 automated-teller machines remained out of order . 
The most extensive damage was in small towns near the quake 's epicenter , 80 miles south of San Francisco . 
Santa Cruz County estimates total damage at nearly $ 600 million . 
Santa Clara County has a running total so far of $ 504 million , excluding the hard-hit city of Los Gatos . 
Oakland officials were still uncertain about the magnitude of structural damage late yesterday ; a section of I-880 , a twotiered highway , collapsed in Oakland , causing a majority of the deaths resulting from the quake . 
San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos estimated that damages to the city total $ 2 billion . 
That includes dwellings in the ravaged Marina district that must be demolished , peeled business facades south of Market Street , and houses in the city 's outer Richmond district that were heaved off their foundations . 
Many streets and sidewalks buckled , and subterranean water mains and service connections ruptured . 
The federal funds would go to a range of programs , including the Federal Emergency Management Agency , highway construction accounts and the Small Business Administration , according to Rep. Vic Fazio ( D. , Calif . ) . 
FEMA , which coordinates federal disaster relief , is already strapped by the costs of cleaning up after Hurricane Hugo , which hit the Carolinas last month . 
It is likely to get as much as $ 800 million initially in additional funds , and eventually could get more than $ 1 billion , according to Mr. Fazio , a member of the House Appropriations Committee . 
White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said there is enough money on hand to deal with immediate requirements . 
The Bush administration has at its disposal $ 273 million in funds remaining from the $ 1.1 billion Congress released for the cleanup after Hurricane Hugo . 
`` We feel we have the money necessary to handle the immediate , short-term requirements , '' Mr. Fitzwater said . 
He added that the Office of Management and Budget , the Transportation Department and other agencies are `` developing longer-term legislation '' that should be ready soon . 
Much of the cost of cleaning up after the earthquake will involve repairing highways and bridges . 
California lawmakers are seeking changes in rules governing the federal highway relief program so more money can be made available for the state . 
Some things ca n't be repaired . 
The Asian Art Museum in Golden Gate Park reports $ 10 million to $ 15 million in damage , including shattered porcelains and stone figures . 
Its neighbor , the De Young Museum , totaled $ 3 million to $ 5 million in structural damage and shattered sculpture . 
The city 's main library is closed because of fissures that opened in its walls , and marble facings and ornamental plaster at the Beaux Arts City Hall broke off in the temblor . 
The ground along the Embarcadero the street that skirts the city 's eastern boundary and piers -- dropped six inches after the quake , wreaking major damage to at least one of the piers . 
At San Francisco International Airport , shock waves wrecked the control tower , knocking down computers and shattering glass . 
Offices of the city 's Rent Board were destroyed . 
Mayor Agnos 's $ 2 billion estimate does n't include damage to freeway arteries leading into the city , some of which remained closed . 
A major chunk of the $ 2 billion is expected to be eaten up by overtime for city workers deployed in the emergency , said a spokesman for Mr. Agnos . 
`` All of the city 's $ 5.9 million emergency reserve was spent in the first 24 hours '' on overtime salaries , he said . 
Insurers struggled to to get a firm grasp on the volume of claims pouring into their offices . 
At Fireman 's Fund Corp. , a spokesman said 142 claims were received in the first 24 hours after the quake , and the company is braced for as many as 5,000 claims from its 35,000 residential and 35,000 business policyholders in the affected area . 
`` Claims range from a scratched fender -- and there were an awful lot of cars damaged in this -- to a major processing plant , '' a spokesman said . 
`` We 're delivering a check for $ 750,000 to an automotive business in Berkeley that burned on Tuesday . '' 
Fireman 's is part of a $ 38 million syndicate that supplies business interruption insurance to the city on the Bay Bridge , which must pay employees during the three weeks or more it is expected to be out of service and deprived of toll income . 
California lawmakers want to eliminate temporarily a $ 100 million cap on the amount of federal highway relief for each state for each disaster , as well as a prohibition on using the emergency highway aid to repair toll roads . 
In addition , under the highway-relief program , the federal government provides 100 % of emergency highway aid for only the first 90 days of a repair effort . 
After that , the federal share diminishes . 
For interstate highways , the federal share normally would drop to 90 % of the cost of repairs , and the state would have to pick up the remainder of the cost . 
But lawmakers want to extend the period for 100 % federal funding for several months . 
Those changes also would apply to two areas hit hard by Hurricane Hugo -- South Carolina and the U.S. Virgin Islands , according to an aide to Rep. Fazio . 
Meanwhile , the FEMA announced a toll-free telephone number ( 800-462-9029 ) to expedite service to victims of the earthquake . 
Lines will be available 24 hours a day to take applications for such disaster relief as temporary housing and emergency home repairs by phone . 
Transportation officials are expecting utter traffic pandemonium beginning Monday and growing worse over the next several weeks . 
Some 250,000 cars normally cross the closed Bay Bridge between Oakland and San Francisco daily . 
Officials say it is clear that alternate routes ca n't handle the overflow . 
The state is calling in a flotilla of navy landing vessels and other boats to expand ferry service across the bay and hopes to add numerous new bus routes and train departures to help alleviate the traffic problem . 
Moreover , state officials are urging freight haulers to bypass many of the area 's main highways and to travel late at night or during predawn hours . 
Even so , `` We 're looking for chaos , '' said George Gray , a deputy district director at the California Department of Transportation . 
`` If there 's any way you can do it , you ought to go to Idaho and go fishing for a while . '' 
Most of San Francisco 's tourists and business travelers already have left -- despite hotel 's offers of rate cuts . 
`` Everyone left , '' said Peter Lang , reservations manager of the Mark Hopkins Hotel . 
The Westin St. Francis hotel , which survived the 1906 earthquake and fire , currently is less than 50 % occupied . 
`` We still have our die-hard baseball fans , '' a spokesman said . 
`` One lady from New York said she 's not going home until the { World Series } is over . '' 
Gerald F. Seib and Joe Davidson in Washington contributed to this article . 
Is an American Secretary of State seriously suggesting that the Khmer Rouge should help govern Cambodia ? 
Apparently so . 
There are no easy choices in Cambodia , but we ca n't imagine that it benefits the U.S. to become the catalyst for an all-too-familiar process that could end in another round of horror in Cambodia . 
Now that Vietnam appears to have pulled out its occupation army , the State Department is talking again about accepting an `` interim '' coalition government in the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh . 
The coalition would include the current Vietnamese-backed Hun Sen regime , the two non-communist resistance groups led by Son Sann and Prince Sihanouk , and the Khmer Rouge . 
The aim would be to end the guerrilla war for control of Cambodia by allowing the Khmer Rouge a small share of power . 
The State Department says that any Khmer Rouge participation would have to be `` minimal . '' 
The usual problem with including communists in `` interim '' coalition governments is that their ideology and methods require they squeeze out everyone else . 
Recall that Nicaragua 's Sandinistas came into Managua as partners in a coalition government with anti-Somoza moderates . 
Within two years , the moderates were exiled or in prison , Nicaragua had gone communist , and the Sandinistas were building one of the biggest armies in Latin America and threatening their neighbors . 
In Laos , when the Western powers bowed to pressure for such a coalition it turned out they were opening the door to communist domination . 
Even Mao Tse-tung 's China began in 1949 with a partnership between the communists and a number of smaller , non-communist parties . 
What complicates the scene in Cambodia is that the current regime is already communist , as are its Vietnamese overseers back in Hanoi , as are the Khmer Rouge -- who are the strongest of the three guerrilla groups . 
It 's not clear which crew of communists might prevail in a coalition government , but the one good bet is that the non-communists would disappear . 
That would leave Hun Sen and the Khmer Rouge . 
The Hun Sen regime has sent thousands of conscript laborers to die of malaria and malnourishment while building Cambodia 's equivalent of the Berlin Wall near the Thai border . 
The Khmer Rouge , however , carry an unsurpassed record for Cambodian tyranny . 
These utopians caused the deaths -- by starvation , disease or execution -- of well over one million Cambodians . 
The Cambodian horror was so bad that the Vietnamese occupation in 1978 was a perverse form of relief . 
The world might want to believe that the Khmer Rouge ca n't still be such bad guys , just as in the late 1970s it was reluctant to credit the reports of genocide then taking place . 
But there is no solid evidence that the Khmer Rouge have changed . 
Some of our sources in Thailand say the notorious old Khmer Rouge leader , Pol Pot , has been holed up this summer in Khmer Rouge camps near the Thai-Cambodian border . 
So it 's difficult to swallow the notion that Mr. Baker is willing to accept conditions that would help the Khmer Rouge set up shop again in Phnom Penh . 
True , Prince Sihanouk backs the idea of such a coalition , at least for this week . 
But Prince Sihanouk has backed all sorts of ideas over the years , and done rather better by himself than by Cambodia . 
Nor should the U.S. worry much about offending China , which still aids the Khmer Rouge . 
It 's time the State Department recognized that China does not play by gentlemen 's rules . 
For the U.S. to lend even the slightest support to the most infamous killers on Indochina 's bleak scene could only disturb America 's allies elsewhere . 
It would be entirely rational for communist insurgents in countries such as the Philippines or Peru to conclude the following : Fight viciously enough and the U.S. , under the banner of pragmatism , might eventually help negotiate your way to victory . 
U.S. diplomacy has done it before , and it will likely do it again . 
The administration and Congress have lately tangoed around the idea of sending military aid to Cambodia 's non-communists . 
But now the possibility of `` diplomatic movement '' ( Vietnam 's withdrawal , the Baker initiative ) has put that plan on hold , with the proviso that if the going got rough , the U.S. would then rearm the opposition . 
Why the timidity ? 
At the very least , the odds are heavily weighted against the prospects of preventing the Khmer Rouge and Cambodia 's communists from ultimately moving against their opponents . 
When that day comes , it would be particularly awful to know that the United States sat on military aid and deprived these people of the means to settle their fate with at least a little honor . 
Michael F. Harris , 53 , was named executive vice president , North America , for the Financial Times , the business newspaper published by this company that also has interests in book publishing , fine china , oil services and investment banking . 
Mr. Harris had been vice president for the newspaper 's advertising in New York . 
He takes additional responsibility for newspaper sales and distribution of the Financial Times in North America . 
Laurance V. Allen , 44 , who had been director for North America , resigned to pursue other business interests and do some consulting . 
Cipher Data Products Inc. posted a net loss of $ 14.2 million , or 97 cents a share , for its fiscal first quarter , compared with net income of $ 3.8 million , or 27 cents a share , a year ago . 
Revenue for the quarter ended Sept. 30 fell 20 % , to $ 41.3 million from $ 51.9 million in the year-earlier period . 
Cipher Data , a San Diego maker of magnetic tape peripherals and optical disc drives , said the loss included reserves of $ 3.8 million related to a corporate restructuring . 
The restructuring calls for a 24 % reduction in its work force over the next two months , affecting about 525 jobs , Cipher Data said . 
It is eliminating the positions of president and chief operating officer , formerly held by Edward L. Marinaro . 
Cipher Data said Mr. Marinaro consequently has resigned from those posts and from the company 's board . 
Mr. Marinaro could n't immediately be reached for comment . 
FileNet Corp. , Costa Mesa , Calif. , said it expects to report a third-quarter loss of about $ 1.8 million , or 17 cents a share , because of a $ 2.5 million reserve to be taken against potential losses on a contract with the state of California . 
Revenue is estimated at $ 18.6 million . 
The maker of document image processing equipment said the state procurement division had declared FileNet in default on its contract with the secretary of state uniform commercial code division . 
FileNet said it does n't believe the state has a valid basis of default and is reviewing its legal rights under the contract , but said it ca n't predict the outcome of the dispute . 
The disagreement centers on testing deadlines and other issues involving a FileNet system installed earlier this year . 
State officials could n't be reached for comment late yesterday . 
FileNet noted that it had cash and marketable securities totaling $ 22.5 million on Sept. 30 , and stockholders ' equity is $ 60.1 million . 
The company made the announcement after the close of the markets , where its stock finished at $ 10.75 , up 25 cents , in over-the-counter trading . 
Clinton Gas Systems Inc. said it received a contract from Timken Co. , Canton , Ohio , to manage the natural gas purchasing , scheduling and transportation activities for Timken 's seven Ohio and two Pennsylvania plants . 
Clinton and Timken agreed not to disclose the value of the contract . 
Timken , a producer of bearings and specialty steel , already buys gas from Clinton . 
Clinton said in Columbus , Ohio , that its Clinton Gas Marketing unit wants to line up a number of such gas management contracts . 
Manufacturers frequently do n't have anyone who is a specialist in natural gas , Clinton said , and a specialist such as Clinton can save them substantial amounts of money . 
The scene opens with pinstripe-suited executives -- Easterners , obviously -- glued to cellular phones and hightailing it out of town in chauffeur-driven limousines . 
`` The carpetbaggers , '' snorts the narrator with a Texas twang , `` have packed their bags and went . '' 
But , he continues , `` They 're forgetting we 're all Texans . 
The Lone Star is on the rise again . '' 
As the music swells , viewers discover they 're watching a commercial for Lone Star Beer , the pride of Texas , a product of G. Heileman Brewing Co. , a La Crosse , Wis. , unit of Bond Corp . 
As the ad 's tone implies , the Texas spirit is pretty xenophobic these days , and Lone Star is n't alone in trying to take advantage of that . 
From Chevy trucks to Lipton iced tea to a host of battling banks , the state has been inundated with broadcast commercials and print advertising campaigns celebrating Texans and castigating outsiders . 
While advertisers have long appealed to Texans ' state pride and prejudices , the latest trend has been sparked , in part , by the state 's recent hard economic times . 
That has taken some of the swagger out of natives who like to brag that Texas is the only state that was once a nation , but it has increased their legendary resentment of outsiders . 
In the past , writes Houston Chronicle columnist Jim Barlow , outlanders were accepted only after passing a series of tests to prove they had the `` right '' Texas attitudes and `` of course they had to be dipped for parasites . '' 
There is no small irony in the fact that some of the most-jingoistic advertising comes courtesy of -- you guessed it -- outsiders . 
Lone Star 's Bond Corp. parent , for instance , hails from Perth , Australia . 
North Carolinians , New Yorkers , Californians , Chicagoans and Ohioans own Texas banks . 
All kinds of landmark Texas real estate has been snapped up by out-of-staters . 
Even the beloved Dallas Cowboys were bought by an Arkansas oil man . 
`` Texas has lost its distinctiveness , leaving Texans with a hunger to feel proud about themselves , '' says Stephen Klineberg , a sociology professor at Rice University , Houston . 
`` This plays right into the hands of the advertising agencies . '' 
For example , the iced-tea radio campaign for Thomas J. Lipton Co. , an Englewood Cliffs , N.J. , unit of Anglo-Dutch Unilever Group , emphatically proclaims : `` Real Texans do not wear dock-siders -- ever . 
Real Texans do n't play paddleball , at least I hope not . 
This is football country . 
And another thing -- real Texans drink Lipton iced tea . '' 
In developing that theme at Interpublic Group of Cos . ' Lintas : New York unit , account supervisor Lisa Buksbaum says she made a `` couple of phone calls '' to Dallas ad friends and reported her `` findings '' to a team of writers . 
Her findings ? 
`` You know , '' she says , `` stereotypical stuff like armadillos , cowboys and football . '' 
Not exactly sophisticated market research , but who cares as long as the campaigns work . 
And ad agencies insist that they do . 
Stan Richards of Richards Group Inc. , Dallas , tells of the Texan who saw the agency 's tear-jerking commercial for First Gibraltar Bank F.S.B. -- complete with the state 's anthem -- and promptly invested $ 100,000 in the thrift 's CDs . 
Never mind that First Gibraltar is one of the failed Texas thrifts taken over by outsiders -- in this case , an investor group headed by New York financier Ronald Perelman . 
The North Texas Chevy Dealers recently had a record sales month after the debut of ad campaign that thumbs its nose at elite Easterners . 
And deposits at NCNB Texas National Bank , a unit of NCNB Corp. , Charlotte , N.C. , have increased $ 2 billion since last year after heavy advertising stressing commitment to Texas . 
`` Obviously , pride sells in Texas , '' says a spokeswoman for Bozell Inc. , Omaha , Neb. , which represents 
The ad campaigns usually follow one of three tracks -- stressing the company 's ` Texasness , ' pointing out the competition 's lack thereof , or trying to be more Texan than Texans . 
Ford trucks may outsell Chevy trucks in places like `` Connecticut and Long Island , '' sniffs a commercial for Chevrolet , a division of General Motors Corp . 
The commercial , created by Bateman , Bryan & Galles Inc. , of Dallas , adds derisively : `` I bet it takes a real tough truck to haul your Ivy League buddies to the yacht club . '' 
Because they want a truck that is `` Texas tough , '' the commercial concludes , `` Texans drive Chevy . '' 
J.C. Penney Co. , which relocated from New York to suburban Dallas two years ago , gently wraps itself in Texas pride through a full-page magazine ad : `` Taking the long-range view to conserve what is of value to future generations is part of the Lone Star lifestyle , '' the ad reads . 
`` It 's part of our style , too . '' 
According to several ad-agency sources , newcomers to the Texas banking market are spending a combined $ 50 million this year to woo Texans . 
Meanwhile , surviving Texas banking institutions are busily pitching themselves as the only lenders who truly care about the state . 
The most-strident anti-outsider sentiment among bankers comes from the Independent Bankers Association of Texas , although it 's hard to tell from previews of the $ 5 million `` The I 's of Texas '' TV campaign . 
Commercials will highlight heart-rending scenes of Texas and chest-swelling , ain't-it-great-to-be-a-Texan music . 
Supporting banks will sign a `` Texas Declaration of Independents . '' 
But in introductory material for the campaign , the trade group urges members to `` arm '' for a `` revolution '' against big , out-of-state bank-holding companies . 
A video sent to association members , featuring shots of the Alamo , cowboys , fajitas and a statue of Sam Houston , does n't mince words . 
`` Texans can sniff a phony a mile away , '' the narrator warns outsiders . 
`` So , do n't come and try to con us with a howdy y'all or a cowboy hat . '' 
Young & Rubicam 's Pact 
Young & Rubicam , fighting charges that it bribed Jamaican officials to win the Jamaica Tourist Board ad account in 1981 , said it will no longer create the tourist board 's advertising . 
In a statement , Alex Kroll , Young & Rubicam 's chairman , said `` under the present circumstances { we } have agreed that it is prudent to discontinue that contract . '' 
Young & Rubicam has pleaded innocent to the charges . 
The board would n't comment on its impending search for a new ad agency to handle its estimated $ 5 million to $ 6 million account . 
Ad Notes ... . 
NEW ACCOUNT : 
Sunshine Biscuits Inc. , Woodbridge , N.J. , awarded its estimated $ 5 million account to Waring & LaRosa , New York . 
The account had been at Della Femina McNamee WCRS , New York . 
MEDIA POLICY : 
MacNamara Clapp & Klein , a small New York shop , is asking magazine ad representatives to tell it when major advertising inserts will run in their publications . 
It says it may pull its clients ' ads from those magazines . 
COKE ADS : 
Coca-Cola Co. said it produced a new version of its 1971 `` I 'd like to teach the world to sing '' commercial . 
The ad is part of Classic Coke 's 1990 ad campaign , with the tag line , `` Ca n't beat the Real Thing . '' 
Basketball star Michael Jordan and singer Randy Travis have also agreed to appear in ads . 
Dell Computer Corp. , squeezed by price pressure from its larger competitors and delays in its new product line , said its per-share earnings for fiscal 1990 will be half its previous forecasts . 
Although the personal computer maker said it expects revenue to meet or exceed previous projections of $ 385 million for the year ending Jan. 28 , 1990 , earnings are expected to be 25 cents to 35 cents a share , down from previous estimates of 50 cents to 60 cents . 
Earnings for fiscal 1989 were $ 14.4 million , or 80 cents a share , on sales of $ 257.8 million . 
Results for the third quarter ending Oct. 31 , are expected to be released the third week of November , according to Michael Dell , chairman and chief executive officer . 
Mr. Dell said he does n't expect a loss in either the third or fourth quarter , but said third-quarter earnings could be as low as four cents a share . 
In the third quarter last year , Dell had net income of $ 5 million , or 26 cents a share , on sales of $ 75.2 million . 
Mr. Dell attributed the earnings slide to new product delays , such as a laptop scheduled for September that wo n't be introduced until early November . 
Some delays have been caused by a shortage of micoprocessors -- notably Intel Corp. 's newest chip , the 486 -- but others apparently have been caused by Dell 's explosive growth and thinly stretched resources . 
`` They 've got a lot of different balls in the air at the same time , '' observes Jim Poyner , a computer securities analyst with Dallas-based William K. Woodruff & Co . 
Mr. Dell , meanwhile , concedes the company was `` definitely too optimistic '' in its expectations . 
Product delays , however , have left Dell buffeted by harsher competition in its bread-and-butter line of desktop computers , as powerhouse competitors Compaq Computer Corp. and International Business Machines Corp. price their PCs more aggressively . 
The result has been thinner margins , which have been further eroded by an ambitious research and development effort and rapid overseas expansion . 
Analyst James Weil of the Soundview Financial Group believes Dell 's response has been to place increased emphasis on product quality , `` in an effort to rise above some of that price pressure . '' 
But that has been the key to Compaq 's success , he adds , whereas Dell carved out its market niche as a direct seller of low-cost but reliable computers -- and it might be too late in the game for a shift in strategy . 
In national over-the-counter trading , Dell closed yesterday at $ 6 a share , down 87.5 cents . 
TransAtlantic Holdings PLC , a British-based , South African-controlled financial services investment group , and France 's Societe Centrale Union des Assurances de Paris reached an accord effectively reducing chances of an unfriendly takeover for Sun Life Assurance Society PLC . 
In a joint statement , the two companies , whose combined holdings equal 52.7 % of Sun Life 's ordinary shares , said their agreement is aimed at reducing `` the uncertainty and instability for Sun Life that has resulted from two major shareholders owning '' a controlling interest in the company . 
TransAtlantic , whose Transol Investments Ltd. unit owns the largest minority stake in Sun Life , has agreed not to make a takeover bid for the British life insurer without the prior consent of the French company , known as UAP . 
In return , the agreement would force UAP to buy TransAtlantic 's 29.8 % holding in Sun Life or sell its 22.9 % stake to TransAtlantic at a price set by Transatlantic . 
Pride Petroleum Services Inc. said it agreed to buy well-servicing assets of two companies and expects to report higher third-quarter revenue and earnings . 
In the year-earlier quarter , the well-servicing contractor had net income of $ 319,000 , or 3 cents a share , on revenue of about $ 15 million . 
Results for the earlier quarter included a $ 100,000 restructuring charge . 
Separately , the Houston concern said it signed letters of intent for the cash and stock purchases of a total of 29 well-servicing rigs from two concerns located in New Mexico and California . 
It did n't disclose specifics but said it expects to complete the purchases by Nov. 1 . 
Schlumberger Ltd. , New York , reported third-quarter net income edged up as growth in its oil-field services sector offset a decline in interest income . 
The lower interest income occurred because Schlumberger spent $ 1.2 billion buying back its stock last year . 
Net for the oil-field services and electronic measurements and systems concern rose to $ 114.2 million , or 48 cents a share , from $ 112.2 million , or 42 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Per-share earnings advanced 14 % because of the buy-back . 
Revenue declined 6.3 % to $ 1.11 billion from $ 1.18 billion . 
But excluding businesses acquired or sold , revenue was flat at about $ 1.24 billion . 
Nine-month net fell 9.5 % to $ 323.4 million , or $ 1.36 a share , from $ 357.2 million , or $ 1.32 a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue dropped 5.4 % to $ 3.48 billion from $ 3.68 billion . 
This year 's nine-month results include gains of $ 13 million , or five cents a share , from the sale of Schlumberger 's defense systems business , and $ 22 million , or nine cents a share , from an award by the IranU.S . Claims Tribunal . 
The year-earlier nine months include a gain of $ 35 million , or 13 cents a share , from sale of the company 's Electricity Control & Transformers division . 
NEW ENGLAND CRITICAL CARE Inc. offered $ 35 million in convertible subordinated debentures through Morgan Stanley & Co. and Prudential-Bache Capital Funding . 
The debentures , due in 2014 , have a coupon of 7 3\/4 % , payable semiannually . 
The debentures may be converted into common stock of the Westborough , Mass. , home health care concern at $ 52.50 a share . 
Proceeds will be used for working capital and general corporate purposes , including expansion of the company 's operations . 
The French building group Dumez S.A. said profit jumped 70 % in the first half of 1989 , partly on the strength of nonrecurring gains from a share issue by its Canadian unit . 
Dumez said group profit after payments to minority interests rose to 252 million francs ( $ 40.1 million ) from 148 million a year earlier . 
Revenue rose 40 % to 13.32 billion francs from 9.53 billion . 
The group noted that 75 million francs of the advance reflected a one-time gain from the June offering by its United Westburne unit in Canada . 
It did n't say if its year-earlier results were influenced significantly by nonrecurring elements . 
For all of 1988 , Dumez had group profit of 452 million francs after payment to minority interests . 
Revenue was 21.98 billion francs . 
The group has n't forecast full-year earnings for 1989 , although it said that its first-half results are n't a good indication because of one-time elements and the seasonal nature of its operations . 
Tuesday 's earthquake will depress local real-estate values in the short term and force companies to reconsider expanding in or relocating to the Bay Area and California , real-estate and relocation specialists said . 
Few specialists said they expect the quake to have much of an effect on most California property values . 
But real-estate experts and brokers said the quake undoubtedly will drag down prices in neighborhoods built on less stable ground , especially in the Bay Area . 
`` California prices were already coming down . 
This is n't going to help , '' said Kenneth T. Rosen , chairman of the Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics at the University of California at Berkeley . 
State housing prices , at a median $ 201,028 , have declined in recent months because of potential buyers ' inability to afford homes . 
Mr. Rosen , among others , suggested that the quake , the strongest since the 1906 temblor that struck San Francisco , will in the short term create a two-tier price system for quake-prone communities , with dwellings built on sturdy ground likely to demand higher prices . 
One San Francisco neighborhood likely to test Mr. Rosen 's theory soon is the city 's fashionable Marina district , which boasts some of the highest home prices in the state . 
The district , built on landfill , suffered heavy quake damage , including collapsed buildings . 
Yesterday , the city demolished two dwellings in the district because of severe structural damage and said as many as 19 of the district 's 350 dwellings might have to be razed . 
Brokers agreed with the two-tier price theory . 
`` My gut feeling is that the Marina properties will be affected , '' said Grace Perkins , senior vice president at Grubb & Ellis Residential Brokerage Inc . 
Neither she nor other real-estate executives and brokers could project how much less Marina properties might bring , but she said the two-tier price structure would affect prices `` for a while . '' 
Mr. Rosen said the quake will revive consumer interest in a little-publicized 1972 state law that requires brokers to disclose to potential buyers how close a property sits to a fault line . 
Because of the size of the California market , few relocation specialists expect a widespread corporate flight in the quake 's aftermath . 
But they said the quake will force some companies to relocate or expand part or all of their operations outside the state . 
`` What you 're going to get is ` We do n't want to put all of our eggs in one basket ' theory , '' said James H. Renzas , president of Location Management Services Inc. , a Palo Alto , Calif. , relocation concern . 
Mr. Renzas , among others , said the quake will prod companies in certain industries , like semiconductors , computers and aerospace , to consider moving operations that involve particularly sensitive machinery to locations outside California . 
Because of the quake threat , `` some firms have evaluated what the cost is to shore up their buildings and compared it with the cost of building it elswehere , '' he said . 
One Southern California aerospace firm , for example , two months ago asked Location Management to compare the costs of reinforcing its current building against earthquakes with the cost of building a new structure elsewhere . 
A new dwelling would cost $ 21 million , Location Management found , compared with $ 22 million to make the present building earthquake-proof . 
The company , Mr. Renzas said , has n't yet determined what to do . 
NATIONWIDE HEALTH PROPERTIES , Pasadena , Calif. , said it would n't pay its fourth-quarter dividend , despite a 44 % increase in third-quarter earnings , to $ 3.5 million , or 42 cents a share . 
Net income included a gain of $ 708,000 on asset sales , the real estate investment trust said . 
A year earlier , Nationwide Health earned $ 2.4 million , or 29 cents a share . 
Revenue rose 3 % to $ 9 million from $ 8.8 million . 
Nationwide Health said that although it has the cash to cover the 25-cent-a-share dividend , its banks have denied the company 's request to pay it because the trust has n't met certain terms . 
Nationwide Health said it has `` numerous financing activities '' under way to remedy the problem and will make up the dividend payment later if possible . 
Aussedat Rey S.A. , a French paper producer , said it concluded an agreement with Japan 's Fuji Photo Film Co. that will allow Aussedat Rey to manufacture and sell thermal paper using Fuji technology . 
Aussedat Rey is a leading French maker of copying and electronic printing paper . 
Thermal paper is used in facsimile machines . 
Terms of the agreement were n't disclosed . 
Aussedat Rey 's move follows similar technology-licensing agreements between Japanese producers of thermal paper and European paper groups . 
W.R. Grace & Co. , New York , said its earnings for the third quarter nearly doubled as a result of a $ 114.4 million pre-tax gain from restructuring its energy operations and other adjustments . 
Net income rose to $ 97.9 million , or $ 1.15 a share , from $ 50.5 million , or 60 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales increased 7 % to $ 1.49 billion from $ 1.39 billion . 
The gain resulted from the sale of Grace Equipment Co. , the initial public offering of a one-sixth interest in Grace Energy Corp. and an adjustment in the carrying value of certain natural resource assets not part of Grace Energy . 
The international specialty chemical company 's earnings were hurt by an accrual for stock-appreciation rights that reflected a 19 % increase in the stock price , and higher interest expenses . 
Anglo American Corp. of South Africa Ltd. said the third-quarter combined profit of its six gold mines dropped 8.5 % from the previous quarter . 
Total net income fell to 471.6 million rand ( $ 178.0 million ) from 515.4 million rand in the June quarter . 
Total gold production by all six mines rose 4 % to 63,971 kilograms from 61,493 kilograms in the previous quarter . 
Doman Industries Ltd. said it increased its stake in Western Forest Products Ltd. to 56 % from 22 % , through a two-step transaction valued at 137 million Canadian dollars ( $ US116.7 million ) . 
Doman is based in Duncan , British Columbia . 
The company , founded and controlled by Harbanse Doman , its chairman and president , said the purchase would make it Canada 's 10th largest forest products company . 
Under terms of the transaction , which was proposed in June , Doman said it acquired International Forest Products Ltd. 's 22 % stake in Western Forest , and Western Forest , in a related transaction , bought back a 22 % interest in the company from Fletcher Challenge Canada Ltd . 
The Fletcher Challenge Canada stake was then canceled , Doman said , raising Doman 's interest in Western Forest to 56 % . 
Doman said it was also granted an option to acquire the remaining 44 % interest in Western Forest , which is currently held by two Canadian banks . 
International Forest , Western Forest , and Fletcher Challenge Canada are Vancouver-based forest products concerns . 
The Canadian government introduced in the House of Commons legislation to extend federal regulatory authority over provincial government-owned telephone utilities in Alberta , Saskatchewan and Manitoba . 
The legislation would open the way for more telephone services and more competition in the telephone business in the three provinces , federal officials said . 
The federal government initiative follows a recent Canadian Supreme Court decision that held that the major telephone companies in Alberta , Saskatchewan and Manitoba and in the Atlantic coast provinces were interprovincial undertakings and subject to federal legislative authority . 
Prior to the ruling the federal government had regulated only the telephone companies in Quebec , Ontario , British Columbia and the Northwest Territories . 
The governments of Alberta , Saskatchewan and Manitoba have strongly opposed federal regulation of their telephone companies . 
The extension of federal regulatory authority over telephone utilities in the Atlantic provinces has n't required special legislation because they are investor-owned . 
Amdura Corp. said its bank group , led by Chicago-based Continental Bank , agreed to extend its $ 40 million bridge loan until March 31 , 1990 , and gave it a new $ 30 million credit line . 
Under terms of the loan agreement , Amdura said it will omit the next quarterly dividends on its Series A , B , C and D preferred shares , which are due Nov. 15 . 
Since the preferred stock is cumulative , Amdura said it will pay all omitted dividends , which range from $ 1.19 to $ 4.88 a share , when debt-reduction requirements have been met . 
Amdura 's bridge loan , part of the financing for Amdura 's acquisition of CoastAmerica in December 1988 , was to come due next Friday . 
The company 's new management , which took control of Amdura 's board after a consent solicitation last month , wanted to extend the loan while it tries to sell two units . 
Proceeds from those sales will be used to reduce debt . 
Amdura , a Denver hardware and automotive distributor , said the new credit agreement will provide the working capital needed to meet ongoing requirements . 
Three savings-and-loan institutions in Kansas and Texas were added to the Resolution Trust Corp. 's conservatorship program after federal regulators declared the thrifts insolvent and named the RTC their receiver . 
The deposits , assets and certain liabilities of the three thrifts were transferred to newly chartered federal mutual institutions . 
The three institutions are : Mid Kansas Federal Savings & Loan Association , Wichita , which had $ 830.5 million in assets ; Valley Federal Savings & Loan Association of McAllen , McAllen , Texas , with $ 582.6 million in assets ; and Surety Savings Association , El Paso , with $ 309.3 million in assets . 
The three insolvent thrifts will maintain normal business hours and operations under RTC-appointed managing agents , while the RTC tries to negotiate permanent resolutions . 
Separately , Century Bank , Phoenix , Ariz. , was closed by Arizona banking officials . 
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. approved the assumption of Century 's deposits and fully secured liabilities by a newly chartered subsidiary of Valley Capital Corp. , Las Vegas . 
The new institution is also called Century Bank , and the failed bank 's five offices will reopen today . 
The failed bank had assets of about $ 129.6 million . 
The newly chartered bank will assume about $ 125.7 million in 10,300 deposit accounts and pay the FDIC a purchase premium of $ 2.9 million . 
It also will buy about $ 91.7 million of assets , and the FDIC will advance $ 31.8 million to the assuming bank . 
Lonrho PLC of Britain is to come to the rescue of the French distribution group Societe Commerciale de l'Ouest Africaine in an operation that has been engineered with the Paribas financial group , Societe Commerciale 's main shareholder . 
The announcement came as Societe Commerciale , a trading company with activities in more than 40 countries , reported a loss of 320.5 million francs ( $ 51 million ) for the first six months of this year , partly because of provisions on future losses . 
The rescue operation will consist of a capital boost for Societe Commerciale of one billion francs through issues of new shares and convertible bonds . 
Cie . Financiere de Paribas said it intends to transfer its 30 % shareholding in Societe Commerciale to a new company which will be jointly owned with Lonrho . 
This will give Paribas and Lonrho joint control of Societe Commerciale . 
Paribas said Lonrho will participate in the forthcoming capital boost for Societe Commerciale . 
International Business Machines Corp. and MCA Inc. said they agreed to sell their Discovision Associates joint venture to U.S. units of Pioneer Electronic Corp. for $ 200 million . 
The joint venture licenses a portfolio of about 1,400 patents and patent applications relating to optical-disk recording technology . 
IBM and MCA formed Discovision in 1979 to make laser-read optical products . 
But the partners did n't believe the market for the systems was developing as rapidly as they had hoped . 
After reportedly investing $ 100 million in the business , Discovision ceased manufacturing operations in 1982 and sold many of its assets to Tokyo-based Pioneer , among others . 
Discovision now has world-wide license agreements with major manufacturers covering CD audio disks , audio disk players , videodisks and videodisk players . 
It also licenses optically based data storage and retrieval devices . 
James N. Fiedler , president of Discovision and a vice president of MCA , said that IBM and MCA had n't planned to sell the joint venture , which is now profitable , but that Pioneer approached Discovision earlier this year . 
He said it is n't certain whether Discovision 's current management will remain when Pioneer buys the company . 
The agreement is contingent on certain government approvals and should be completed later this year . 
Tokyo stocks closed higher in moderately active but directionless trading as the recent anxiety in world stock markets continued to fade . 
London shares also closed firmer in thin trading driven largely by technical factors and support from a new Wall Street rally . 
Prices also rose on almost every other major exchange in Europe , Asia and the Pacific . 
Tokyo 's Nikkei index of 225 issues , which gained 111.48 points Wednesday , climbed 266.66 , or 0.76 % , to 35374.22 . 
Volume on the first section was estimated at 800 million shares , compared with 841 million Wednesday . 
Winners outnumbered losers 645-293 , with 186 issues unchanged . 
In early trading in Tokyo Friday , the Nikkei index rose 170.65 points , to 35544.87 . 
On Thursday , the Tokyo Stock Price Index of all issues listed in the first section , which gained 0.24 point Wednesday , was up 22.78 , or 0.86 % , at 2665.66 . 
The morning session was dominated by individuals and dealers , but some institutions participated in the afternoon , encouraged by the market 's firmness , traders said . 
Sentiment was helped by the small gain made by New York stocks Wednesday despite anxiety over possible effects of the major earthquake that struck northern California Tuesday . 
Having survived both last Friday 's 6.9 % Wall Street plunge and the immediate aftermath of the San Francisco Bay area earthquake , Tokyo market participants expressed relief that trading had returned to normal . 
Hiroyuki Murai , general manager of the stock trading division at Nikko Securities , said that after looking at the reasons for Friday 's Wall Street plunge , participants realized that the Tokyo and New York markets have different economic fundamentals . 
This conclusion , he said , restored the credibility of Tokyo stocks . 
Yoshiaki Mitsuoka , head of the investment information department at Daiwa Investment Trust & Management , said that if New York stocks just fluctuate in or near their current range , the Tokyo market will remain firm with a moderately upward trend for the rest of the year . 
But traders said the market lacks a base on which to set long-term buying strategy , as the future direction of U.S. interest rates remains unclear . 
`` Investor interest switches back and forth ceaselessly as they are unable to shift their weight to one side for sure , '' Mr. Mitsuoka of Daiwa Investment Trust said . 
Many of Wednesday 's winners were losers yesterday as investors quickly took profits and rotated their buying to other issues , traders said . 
Pharmaceuticals made across-the-board advances . 
Fujisawa Pharmaceutical gained 130 to 1,930 yen ( $ 13.64 ) a share , Mochida Pharmaceutical was up 150 at 4,170 , and Eisai advanced 60 to 2,360 . 
Housing issues were boosted by a report that Daiwa House expects to post 43 % higher earnings for its latest fiscal year , traders said . 
Daiwa House advanced 100 to 2,610 , Misawa Homes was up 60 at 2,940 , and Sekisui House gained 100 to 2,490 . 
Leading construction companies also attracted interest for their strong earnings outlooks , traders said . 
They and many other major Japanese corporations will issue results soon for the fiscal first half ended Sept. 30 . 
Ohbayashi was up 60 to close at 1,680 , Shimizu gained 50 to 2,120 , and Kumagai-Gumi advanced 40 to 1,490 . 
Other winners included real estate issues Mitsubishi Estate , which closed at 2,500 , up 130 , and Mitsui Real Estate Development , which gained 100 to 2,890 . 
Steel shares fell back after advancing for three days . 
Kawasaki Steel was down 11 at 788 , Kobe Steel lost 5 to 723 , and Nippon Steel slipped 6 to 729 . 
Mitsubishi Rayon , a leading advancer Wednesday , fell 44 to 861 as investors grabbed profits . 
London 's Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index finished 19.2 points higher at 2189.3 . 
The Financial Times 30-share index ended 13.6 higher at 1772.1 . 
Volume continued to ease from the active dealings at the start of the week . 
Turnover was 382.9 million shares , compared with 449.3 million Wednesday . 
Dealers said the market was underpinned by a squeeze in FT-SE 100 stocks , particularly among market-makers seeking shares that had been hit hard in recent weeks , such as retailers and building-related concerns . 
But despite the flurry of interest in those shares , dealers said , the market remains nervous about Wall Street 's volatility and high U.K. interest rates . 
U.K. money supply figures for September , released yesterday , showed continued growth in corporate and personal lending , which will keep pressure on the government to maintain tight credit . 
Among the stocks featured in the market-makers ' squeeze was Sears , which closed at 107 pence ( $ 1.70 ) a share , up 3 . 
General Universal Stores , another top-tier stock hit recently by concerns over retail demand in the face of high interest rates , gained 20 to # 10.44 . 
Storehouse gained 2 to 
Another active FT-SE 100 stock was clothing and furniture retailer Burton , which gained 6 to 196 . 
Insurers recovered ground again on market-maker demand and speculative buying linked to talk of mergers in the industry before the European Community 's planned market unification in 
Royal Insurance was the sector 's hottest issue , ending 15 higher at 465 . 
Sun Alliance fell 1 to close at 289 , and General Accident jumped 10 to # 10.13 . 
B.A.T Industries surged in afternoon dealings after its shareholders approved a plan to dispose of its U.S. and U.K. retailing operations to fend off Hoylake Investment 's # 13.4 billion ( $ 21.33 billion ) hostile bid . 
With the company also exercising a plan to buy back as many as 10 % of its shares outstanding , B.A.T closed at 783 , up 27 . 
Turnover was 6.8 million shares , including about four million shares traded in the afternoon after the shareholders ' meeting . 
B.A.T said it purchased 2.5 million shares at 785 . 
In other European markets , shares closed sharply higher in Stockholm , Frankfurt , Zurich and Paris and higher in Milan , Amsterdam and Brussels . 
South African gold stocks closed firmer . 
Prices also closed higher in Singapore , Sydney , Taipei , Wellington , Hong Kong and Manila but were lower in Seoul . 
Here are price trends on the world 's major stock markets , as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective , Geneva . 
To make them directly comparable , each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100 . 
The percentage change is since year-end . 
The federal response to California 's earthquake crisis was marred by coast-to-coast name-calling between the White House and San Francisco 's Mayor Art Agnos . 
Mr. Agnos complained that he was `` ticked off '' that Vice President Dan Quayle , who toured the earthquake site Wednesday , did n't schedule a private meeting with him . 
The mayor said the Quayle visit was `` a publicity stunt . '' 
The White House said Mr. Quayle 's staff had invited the mayor to two meetings of the vice president and groups of local officials and had offered to dispatch a helicopter to pick him up . 
Mr. Agnos declined the invitations , the White House said . 
Marlin Fitzwater , White House press secretary , also asserted that Mr. Agnos had failed to return telephone calls from John Sununu , White House chief of staff . 
`` We regret very much that the mayor of San Francisco has decided not to cooperate with us on this matter in making sure that there is adequate federal support for the disaster in his city , '' Mr. Fitzwater said . 
By late yesterday , both sides appeared prepared to bury the hatchet . 
The White House announced that Mr. Agnos , along with the mayors of Oakland and Alameda , are to accompany President Bush on a tour of the earthquake area today . 
And one White House official reported that Mr. Agnos had been `` very helpful '' in making arrangements for Mr. Bush 's hastily scheduled trip to California . 
Gold and silver broker Preston Semel asked a federal court to halt the Commodity Exchange from imposing a record $ 550,000 fine on his firm . 
The suit , filed in federal court in Manhattan , also asks that the Comex 's nine-month suspension of Mr. Semel be lifted , pending the broker 's appeal of the disciplinary measures . 
The fine and suspension , announced in August , are the stiffest sanctions the Comex has ever ordered against one of its members . 
The Comex accused the 39-year-old Mr. Semel of `` fraudulent conduct '' and improper trading . 
The disciplinary proceedings stem from trading in April 1987 . 
Mr. Semel and his firm , Semel & Co. , have appealed the Comex decision and the sanctions to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission . 
The commission denied Mr. Semel 's request that the fine and suspension be delayed pending the appeal . 
The lawsuit states that unless the sanctions are halted pending an appeal , the broker and his firm `` will be irreparably injured and their business will be totally and permanently destroyed . '' 
Already the firm has paid $ 211,666 of the fine , the suit said , and it will have to liquidate additional assets in order to pay the rest . 
A spokesman for the Comex could n't be reached to comment . 
The Federal National Mortgage Association said 39 lenders across the U.S. have agreed to offer home loans under Fannie Mae 's pilot program for elderly people . 
Fannie Mae , a federally chartered and shareholder-owned company , said the lenders include Prudential Home Mortgage Co. , a unit of Prudential Insurance Co. of America that operates in every state . 
Prudential Insurance is based in Newark , N.J . 
Fannie Mae has agreed to buy as much as $ 100 million of loans under its Seniors ' Housing Opportunities pilot program , which offers four types of loans to people 62 years of age or older to help them maintain their home or obtain housing . 
The loans can be for accessory apartments , for cottages built in a relative 's yard , for home-sharing or for sale-lease-back transactions . 
Fannie Mae makes a secondary market in home loans . 
It buys loans from lenders , packages some into securities for sale to investors and holds the remainder in a portfolio . 
Robert M. Gintel , senior partner of a Greenwich , Conn. , investment firm , said he plans to launch a proxy fight against the board of Boston-based Xtra Corp . 
Mr. Gintel , head of Gintel & Co. , said he plans to conduct a proxy contest to elect a majority of Xtra 's board at the next annual stockholders meeting . 
Xtra , a transportation leasing company , said in a statement it would have no comment on Mr. Gintel 's plans until `` further information has been disclosed by him . '' 
The company also said its 1990 annual meeting has not been scheduled . 
Mr. Gintel owns 300,000 of the company 's 6.3 million common shares outstanding . 
Xtra said it recently bought back approximately 55,000 of its shares pursuant to its existing authorization to acquire as many as 650,000 shares . 
Mr. Gintel has filed suit in Delaware Chancery Court , seeking to block Xtra 's anti-takeover tactic . 
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission , Mr. Gintel said Xtra `` has pursued business strategies that are n't in the best interest of stockholders . 
STOCKS AND BONDS SURGED on the second anniversary of Black Monday as a favorable inflation report prompted speculation of lower interest rates . 
The Dow Jones industrials closed up 39.55 , at 2683.20 , after rising over 60 points in mid-afternoon . 
The rally brought the gain so far this week to about 114 points . 
The dollar finished mixed , while gold declined . 
Consumer prices climbed a moderate 0.2 % in September , mostly due to higher clothing costs . 
Energy prices continued to fall at the retail level , but economists worried about a big rise in wholesale energy costs . 
British Airways dropped out of the current bidding for United Air 's parent , leaving a UAL management-pilots group without a key partner . 
British Air 's move raised new questions about the buy-out group 's efforts to revive a stalled bid for UAL . 
A capital-gains tax-cut plan was dropped by Senate Democrats under pressure from their leadership . 
The move is a setback for Bush , who needs Democratic support to pass a capital-gains cut in the Senate . 
Other tax breaks also are likely to be restored or created in the coming months as special interest groups try to undo the 1986 tax overhaul . 
Many retailers are worried that a price war could erupt this Christmas if cash-strapped firms such as Campeau slash prices to spur sales . 
AT&T unveiled a sweetened early retirement plan for management that the company hopes will save it $ 450 million in the next year . 
Also , profit rose 19 % in the third quarter . 
Chrysler will idle a Toledo assembly plant temporarily due to slowing sales of its profitable Jeep Cherokee and Wagoneer sport utility vehicles . 
Digital Equipment 's profit fell 32 % in the latest quarter , prompting forecasts of weaker results ahead . 
Analysts were troubled by signs of flat U.S. orders at the computer maker . 
IBM plans to unveil over 50 software products on Tuesday to try to end some of the problems in computerizing manufacturing operations . 
The TV units of Paramount and MCA are exploring offering prime-time programming to independent stations two nights a week . 
BankAmerica 's profit jumped 34 % in the third quarter . 
The rapid recovery continued to be fueled by growth in consumer loans , higher interest margins and only minor loan losses . 
Big Board short interest fell 4.2 % for the month ended Oct. 13 , the second decline in a row . 
Borrowed shares on the Amex rose to another record . 
Bell Atlantic posted a strong earnings gain for the third quarter , as did Southern New England Telecommunications . 
But Nynex , Pacific Telesis and U S West had lower profits . 
B.A.T Industries won shareholder approval for a defensive restructuring to fend off Sir James Goldsmith . 
American Express 's profit climbed 21 % in the quarter , aided by a surge in its travel business and despite a big rise in Third World loan reserves . 
Markets -- 
Stocks : Volume 198,120,000 shares . 
Dow Jones industrials 2683.20 , up 39.55 ; transportation 1263.51 , up 15.64 ; utilities 215.42 , up 1.45 . 
Bonds : Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3398.65 , up 
Commodities : Dow Jones futures index 130.13 , up 0.23 ; spot index 130.46 , up 0.10 . 
Dollar : 141.70 yen , up 0.25 ; 1.8470 marks , off 0.0015 . 
Computer Sciences Corp. , El Segundo , Calif. , said the National Aeronautics and Space Administration will negotiate details of a contract valued at about $ 170 million to provide software for the Ames Research Center . 
Included in the three-year contract are options for two one-year renewals . 
NASA awarded the contract to CSC in November but an appeal by Sterling Software Inc. of Dallas sent the contract to the General Services Administration Board of Contract Appeals and the board required NASA to re-evaluate bidders ' proposals . 
Sterling had completed a five-year contract for NASA but lost its bid for renewal . 
As directed by the board , NASA completed the evaluation and again chose CSC . 
For its fiscal year ended March 31 , CSC had revenue of $ 1.3 billion . 
AFTERSHOCKS RATTLED Northern California amid an earthquake cleanup . 
As power and commuters returned to much of downtown San Francisco for the first time since Tuesday 's temblor in the Bay area , three strong aftershocks , one measuring 5.0 on the Richter scale , jolted the region . 
Serious injuries or damages were n't reported . 
Californians , meanwhile , tried to cope with still-limited services , blocked roadways and water shortages in the aftermath of the tremor that left scores dead and injured . 
Thousands remained homeless . 
Bush is to visit the area today , and officials in Washington estimated that emergency assistance would total at least $ 2.5 billion . 
A series of earthquakes struck northern China , killing at least 29 people , injuring hundreds and razing about 8,000 homes , the Xinhua News Agency said . 
The Senate rejected a constitutional amendment sought by Bush to prohibit desecration of the U.S. flag . 
While the proposal won a slight majority , the 51-48 vote was well short of the two-thirds needed to approve changes in the Constitution . 
It was considered a victory for Democratic leaders , who favor a law barring flag burning . 
The House approved an $ 837 million aid package for Poland and Hungary , nearly double what Bush had requested . 
The vote of 345-47 sent the measure to the Senate . 
Britain 's chief justice quashed the murder convictions of four people for Irish Republican Army bombings that killed seven people in 1974 . 
The reversal came after the government conceded that investigators may have faked evidence . 
The `` Guildford Four , '' three Irishmen and an Englishwoman , have been imprisoned since 1975 . 
The Nobel Prize in literature was won by Camilo Jose Cela , a Spanish writer . 
His 1942 novel `` The Family of Pascual Duarte '' is considered the most popular work of fiction in Spanish since Cervantes 's `` Don Quixote '' was published 400 years ago . 
The Swedish Academy in Stockholm cited the 73-year-old Cela for `` rich and intensive prose . '' 
The editor of Pravda was dismissed and succeeded by a confidant of Soviet leader Gorbachev . 
The action at the Communist Party daily , viewed as the Soviet Union 's most authoritative newspaper , was considered the most significant development in a week of Kremlin wrangling over the press , including sharp criticism from Gorbachev . 
East Germany 's new leader met with Lutheran Church officials to discuss a growing opposition movement demanding democratic freedoms . 
As they conferred near East Berlin , a pro-democracy protest erupted in the Baltic city of Greifswald , and activists threatened further rallies against leader Krenz 's expected hard-line policies . 
Police in Prague raided an international meeting on human rights , detaining Czechoslovakia 's former foreign minister , Jiri Hajak , and 14 other activists . 
A leading U.S. human-rights monitor also was briefly held . 
Dissident playwright Vaclav Havel reportedly escaped the crackdown , the fourth against activists in recent days . 
Bush met in Washington with Spain 's Prime Minister Gonzalez and discussed what the president called `` the unique role '' that Madrid can play in furthering democracy in Eastern Europe and Latin America . 
Gonzalez , who pledged to help monitor voting in Nicaragua , was said to be carrying proposals for free elections in Panama . 
The Galileo spacecraft sped unerringly toward the planet Jupiter , while five astronauts aboard the space shuttle Atlantis measured the Earth 's ozone layer . 
The robot probe was dispatched Wednesday by the shuttle crew , which is to conduct a series of medical and other experiments before their scheduled landing Monday in California . 
Argentina and Britain agreed to resume diplomatic and economic relations , seven years after the two nations battled over the Falkland Islands . 
The announcement , in which they said hostilities had ceased , followed a two-day meeting in Madrid . 
Rebel artillerists bombarded the capital of Afghanistan , killing at least 12 people , as the Soviet Union was reported to be airlifting arms and food to Kabul 's forces . 
Fighting also was reported around the strategic town of Khost , near the Pakistani border . 
Saudi Arabia 's foreign minister met in Damascus with President Assad to develop a plan for the withdrawal of Syria 's 40,000 troops from Lebanon as part of a settlement of that nation 's 14-year-old civil war . 
The talks came as Lebanese negotiations on political changes appeared deadlocked . 
GOP Sen. Specter of Pennsylvania said he would vote to acquit federal Judge Alcee Hastings in his impeachment trial on charges of perjury and bribery conspiracy . 
Specter , the vice chairman of the Senate 's evidence panel , said there was `` insufficient evidence to convict '' the Miami jurist . 
After slipping on news of a smaller-than-expected U.S. inflation figure , the dollar rebounded later in the trading day . 
The U.S. unit dipped to a session low against the mark just after the release of the U.S. consumer price index . 
The report showed that September consumer prices rose just 0.2 % , a smaller increase than expected . 
The market had anticipated a 0.4 % rise in the price index . 
The September index fueled speculation , damaging to the dollar , that the Federal Reserve soon will ease monetary policy further . 
But foreign-exchange dealers said the dollar staged a quick comeback , prompted by a round of short covering and some fresh buying interest later in the trading day . 
Traders said that a nearly 40-point gain in the Dow Jones Industrial Average , fueled in part by news of a lower-than-expected price index , had little influence on the dollar 's moves . 
`` The market is beginning to disassociate itself from Wall Street , '' said one New York trader . 
In late New York trading yesterday , the dollar was quoted at 1.8470 marks , down from 1.8485 marks late Wednesday , and at 141.70 yen , up from 141.45 yen late Wednesday . 
Sterling was quoted at $ 1.5990 , up from $ 1.5920 late Wednesday . 
In Tokyo Friday , the U.S. currency opened for trading at 141.93 yen , up from Thursday 's Tokyo close of 141.55 yen . 
Some analysts said the consumer price index reflects a more significant slowdown in the U.S. economy than earlier indicated . 
They point out that September 's producer-price index showed a 0.9 % increase . 
They noted that because the consumer price index , known as the CPI , is a more comprehensive measure of inflation and is rising less rapidly than the producer-price index , or PPI , it could signal further easing by Fed . 
Others suggested , however , that the Fed will hold any changes in monetary policy in check , leaving fed funds at around 8 3\/4 % , down from the 9 % level that prevailed from July through September . 
Kevin Logan , chief economist with the Swiss Bank Corp. , said that both PPI and CPI climbed around 4 1\/2 % year-to-year in September . 
He argued that both CPI and PPI have in fact decelerated since spring . 
`` The Fed wo n't be stampeded into easing , '' Mr. Logan said , predicting that for now , interest rates will stay where they are . 
A four-day matched sale-purchase agreement , a move to drain liquidity from the system , was viewed as a technical move , rather than an indication of tightening credit . 
Market participants note that the mark continues to post heftier gains against its U.S. counterpart than any other major currency , particularly the yen . 
`` There 's a bottomless pit of dollar demand '' by Japanese investors , said Graham Beale , managing director of foreign exchange at Hongkong & Shanghai Banking Corp. in New York , adding that purely speculative demand would n't hold the dollar at its recent levels against the Japanese currency . 
Mr. Beale commented that the mark remains well bid against other currencies as well . 
Robert White , manager of corporate trading at First Interstate of California , called the market `` psychologically pro-mark , '' noting that the U.S. remains a `` veritable grab bag '' for Japanese investors which accounts for the unabated demand for U.S. dollars . 
On the Commodity Exchange in New York , gold dropped $ 1.60 to $ 367.10 an ounce in moderate trading . 
Estimated volume was three million ounces . 
In early trading in Hong Kong Friday , gold was at about $ 366.85 an ounce . 
Hotel Investors Trust and its affiliate , Hotel Investors Corp. , said the companies plan to sell all of the hotels the companies own and operate , except for two hotel-casinos in Las Vegas , Nev . 
The hotels and management interests will be sold at an auction , said John Rothman , president and chief executive officer of the trust and a director of the corporation . 
Value of the properties and management interests was n't disclosed . 
In all , the Los Angeles-based trust plans to sell its interests in 36 hotels , while the corporation will sell its management interests in 32 of those properties . 
Excluded from the sale are the interests of the trust and the corporation in two Las Vegas hotel-casinos . 
After completing the sale and paying debts , the trust and corporation will consider a number of options including a stock repurchase , payment of special dividend or investment in more gaming properties . 
The companies will retain their current regular quarterly dividend of 25 cents during the sale process , Mr. Rothman said . 
For the first six months , the trust and corporation had a net loss of $ 244,000 . 
Baxter International Inc. , citing cost-cutting moves and increased sales of its home-care products and dialysis treatments , posted a 20 % rise in third-quarter net income on a 5.9 % sales boost . 
The Deerfield , Ill. , medical products and services company posted net of $ 102 million , or 34 cents a share , compared with $ 85 million , or 28 cents a share , a year ago . 
Sales totaled $ 1.81 billion up from $ 1.71 billion the previous year . 
For the nine-month period , Baxter said net rose 15 % to $ 307 million , or $ 1.02 a share , from $ 267 million , or 89 cents a share , during the year-ago period . 
Sales for the nine months were up 8 % to $ 5.44 billion from $ 5.04 billion in the same period in 1988 . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Baxter closed at $ 22.25 a share , down 12.5 cents . 
A group bidding for American Medical International Inc. , New York , said it formally received the final financing needed for a $ 3 billion bid for about 86 % of the hospital operator 's stock . 
The offer from IMA Acquisition Corp. , for as many as 63 million shares , is set to expire Wednesday . 
Earlier this month , IMA said it had received about $ 1 billion of senior debt financing from Chemical Bank and six other banks ; Chemical Bank said it was `` highly confident '' it could arrange the balance of about $ 509 million . 
In addition , the $ 3 billion bid includes $ 1 billion of debt that will be assumed by IMA , $ 600 million of high-yield junk bonds that will be sold by First Boston Corp. and $ 285 million of equity . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , American Medical closed at $ 23.625 , up $ 1.875 . 
American Medical has agreed to the offer , but earlier this month said it had received new `` expressions of interest '' from two previous bidders . 
American Medical said it would pursue the inquiries from the companies , but would n't identify them unless they make firm offers . 
H&R Block is one of the great success stories of U.S. business . 
Oddly enough , this presents a problem for the stock . 
Some money managers are disenchanted with H&R Block because they suspect the company 's glory days are past , or at least passing . 
Block 's tax-preparation business is mature , they say , and some of its diversifications are facing tough competition . 
It 's no secret that Block dominates the mass-market tax-preparation business . 
The Street knows all about the predictability of its earnings , which are headed for a ninth consecutive yearly increase . 
The company has consistently earned more than a 20 % annual return on its net worth while many companies would be happy with 15 % . 
But the tax-preparation business simply has no more room to grow , says Mark Cremonie , director of research for Capital Supervisors Inc. , a Chicago firm that manages $ 6.5 billion . 
`` You go to any medium-sized town in the U.S. and you 're going to see H&R Block tax services . '' 
Mr. Cremonie 's firm once held about 4.8 % of H&R Block . 
That was before the 1986 tax `` reform '' made taxes more complex than ever . 
`` One thing you can bet on , '' he says , `` is that Congress will do stupid things with the Tax Code . '' 
But Capital Supervisors sold the last of its H&R Block holdings earlier this year . 
`` They 're thrashing around for diversification , '' he says . 
`` I think a lot of their businesses are just so-so . '' 
Last week the stock hit an all-time high of 37 1\/4 before getting roughed up in the Friday-the-13th minicrash . 
It closed yesterday at 34 3\/4 . 
To be sure , the stock still has a lot of fans . 
`` If you invested $ 10,000 in the initial public offering in 1962 , it would be worth well over $ 5 million today , '' says Fredric E. Russell , a Tulsa , Okla. , money manager . 
`` I do n't know what the risk is { of holding the stock } . 
Taxes are not going out of business . '' 
Many of his peers feel the same way . 
The number of big institutions that own H&R Block shares is 207 and growing , according to a midyear tally by CDA Investment Technologies . 
Brokerage houses are sweet on H&R Block , too . 
Zacks Investment Research counts five brokerage houses that consider the stock a buy , and four that call it a hold . 
None dare say to sell it . 
But some money managers are doing just that . 
Eugene Sit , president of Sit Investment Associates in Minneapolis , says , `` When we bought it , we thought the growth rate was going to accelerate '' because of computerized tax filing and instant refunds ( the customer gets a refund immediately but pays extra to the tax preparer , which waits for Uncle Sam 's check ) . 
But neither of those developments did much to juice up growth , Mr. Sit says . 
He figures Block earnings are now growing at about a 10 % annual rate ( down from about 14 % the past five years ) and will grow at an 8%-10 % rate in the future . 
That 's `` not bad , '' Mr. Sit says , but it sure does n't justify Block shares being priced at 15 to 16 times estimated earnings for fiscal 1990 . 
He wants stocks whose price / earnings ratio is less than their growth rate ; as he figures it , H&R Block does n't even come close . 
Two other money managers , in explaining why they have sold large amounts of H&R Block stock this year , spoke on the condition they not be named . 
`` The stock was going no place and the earnings were so-so , '' said one . 
( In the past two years , the stock almost stalled out . 
It was above 33 , adjusted for a subsequent split , in 1987 , and has n't gotten much higher since . ) 
`` There 's no more growth in the tax business { except } for increasing prices , '' the money manager added . 
The CompuServe subsidiary ( which provides information to home-computer users ) is `` where the growth is , '' he said , but its format is `` still too complicated . '' 
CompuServe provides about 20 % of both sales and earnings . 
The tax business still provides about 70 % of earnings , on about 50 % of sales . 
Personnel Pool ( temporary workers , mostly in the health-care area ) chips in close to 25 % of sales but only about 9 % of earnings . 
The shortage of nurses is crimping profit at Personnel Pool , said the second money manager . 
He concedes H&R Block is `` well-entrenched '' and `` a great company , '' but says `` it does n't grow fast enough for us . 
We 're looking for something that grows faster and sells at a comparable { price-earnings } multiple . '' 
Thomas M. Bloch , president and chief operating officer , says `` I would disagree '' that the tax business is mature . 
For example , he says , the company is planning to go nationwide with a new service , tested in parts of the country , aimed at taxpayers who want refunds in a hurry . 
Mr. Bloch concedes that a recent diversification attempt fell through . 
`` We 're still interested { in diversifying } , '' he says , `` but we 'd rather be prudent than make a mistake . '' 
He also says CompuServe 's earnings continue to grow `` 20 % to 30 % a year '' in spite of tough competition from giants like Sears and IBM . 
And he says Block 's other businesses are growing , although less consistently . 
H&R Block ( NYSE ; Symbol:HRB ) 
Business : Tax Preparation 
Year ended April 30 , 1989 : 
Revenue : $ 899.6 million 
Net loss : $ 100.2 million ; $ 1.90 a share 
First quarter , July 31 , 1989 : 
Per-share earnings : Loss of 8 cents vs. loss of 9 cents 
Average daily trading volume : 145,954 shares 
Philips Industries Inc. said its board authorized the redemption Dec. 6 of the company 's $ 1 cumulative convertible special preferred stock at $ 37.50 a share , not including a 25 cent dividend for the current quarter , and the $ 3 cumulative convertible preferred stock at $ 75 , plus a 75 cent dividend for the current quarter . 
The Dayton , Ohio , maker of parts for the building and transportation industries said holders of the two issues can convert their stock into common shares through the close of business Dec. 1 . 
Each $ 1 cumulative share can be converted into 4.92 common shares ; the ratio on the $ 3 cumulative is eight common shares for each $ 3 cumulative preferred . 
Philips did n't indicate how many shares outstanding it has of either issue . 
Company officials could n't be reached . 
Earlier this month the company said its board approved a proposed management-led leveraged buy-out at $ 25.50 a share , or $ 750 million . 
( During its centennial year , The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history . ) 
PUTS AND CALLS , STOCK MARKET PATOIS for options to sell or buy a company 's shares , were long an arcane Wall Street art best left to the experts , who used them either as a hedge or for pure speculation . 
Options lost some of their mystery in 1973 when the Chicago Board of Trade set up a special exchange to deal in them . 
Until then , options had been traded only in the over-the-counter market , mostly in New York , and in an almost invisible secondary market operating chiefly by telephone . 
The Chicago Board of Trade , the No. 1 U.S. grain market , had long chafed under the attention won by its innovative archrival , the livestock-dealing Mercantile Exchange . 
So the men who ran the grain pits listened when Joseph Sullivan , a 35-year-old former Wall Street Journal newsman , offered them the idea of all-options trading . 
After four year of tinkering and $ 2.4 million in seed money , the board set up the new marketplace , titled it the Chicago Board Options Exchange , and named Sullivan its first president . 
The beginnings were modest . 
The CBOE opened for business on April 26 , 1973 , in what had been a Board of Trade lunchroom . 
It listed just 16 options to buy a `` pilot list '' of stocks on the New York Stock Exchange . 
( Puts , or sell options , would not be added until 1977 . ) 
The 282 members had paid $ 10,000 apiece for seats . 
( The 1989 price : $ 250,000 . ) 
The first day 's business was 911 contracts ( each for 100 shares of one of the listed stocks ) . 
By the end of 1973 , the number of `` underlying '' Big Board stocks had been increased to 50 and the options exchange had run up volume of 1.1 million contracts . 
A year later , it was 5.7 million . 
Last year , more than 1,800 traders on the CBOE bought and sold 112 million contracts on 178 listed stocks , 60 % of all U.S. listed options trading . 
The new exchange drew instant recognition from an unwelcome quarter . 
The government , campaigning against fixed brokerage commissions , promptly sued the CBOE over its minimum-fee system . 
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission ruled unanimously that the financial troubles facing the Seabrook , N.H. , nuclear-power plant have no impact on whether the plant receives a full-power license . 
Massachusetts Attorney General James Shannon , opposing the license , said he will appeal the ruling in federal court . 
Seabrook officials said the plant could receive a full-power license by the end of the year . 
The NRC rejected Mr. Shannon 's argument that Public Service Co. of New Hampshire , which owns the largest share of Seabrook , and 11 other owners are financially unable to guarantee the plant 's safe operation . 
Mr. Shannon was seeking a waiver of NRC policy that ignores financial considerations in making licensing decisions . 
In its ruling , the NRC said that because Seabrook will be allowed to charge rates sufficient to run the plant and make payments on past construction costs , consideration of the owners ' financial condition is pointless . 
`` The commissioners found the circumstances of the case did n't undercut the assurance from government rate setters of available funds adequate for safe operation , '' said a commission spokesman . 
In January 1988 , the utility filed for protection under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code , allowing it to continue to operate while protected from creditors ' lawsuits . 
Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. , New York , the newly merged drug and health-care-product company , reported record third-quarter earnings for both companies in the merger . 
Bristol-Myers Co. and Squibb Corp. , Princeton , N.J. , merged Oct. 4 , but the new company reported third-period earnings for both companies . 
For the fourth quarter , Bristol-Myers Squibb will report one set of earnings . 
Bristol-Myers said net income rose 15 % to $ 266.2 million , or 93 cents a share , from $ 232.3 million , or 81 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales gained 5 % to $ 1.59 billion from $ 1.52 billion . 
Squibb Corp. said net rose 17 % to $ 144.5 million , or $ 1.47 a share , from $ 123 million , or $ 1.25 a share . 
Sales were $ 730.1 million , up 7 % from $ 679.5 million . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Bristol-Myers Squibb rose $ 1.75 to $ 52.75 . 
PPG Industries Inc. , hurt by softness in the U.S. automotive and construction industries , said third-quarter net income fell 5.5 % to $ 106.7 million , or 97 cents a share , from $ 112.9 million , or $ 1.03 a share , a year ago . 
Sales were nearly identical to the year-earlier $ 1.36 billion . 
The drop in earnings did n't surprise analysts who said the Pittsburgh glass , coatings and chemical concern had been predicting a slow quarter because of the sluggish construction industry , a major market for the company 's flat glass . 
Glass sales to Canadian and European auto makers and sales of replacement auto glass in all markets increased . 
The coating segment also posted higher sales particularly in North America and Europe . 
But sale increases were offset by slumping sales in flat glass and fiberglass reinforcements , the company said . 
Also , chemicals sales were slightly down because of lower prices for vinyl chloride monomer and other chlorine derivatives . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , PPG closed at $ 41 a share , down 37.5 cents . 
Jefferies Group Inc. said third-quarter net income fell 4 % , to $ 2.2 million , or 35 cents a share , from $ 2.3 million , or 31 cents a share on more shares , a year earlier . 
Revenue rose 15 % , to $ 36 million from $ 31.2 million . 
Jefferies , a Los Angeles holding company primarily engaged in securities trading , also said stock market declines since the quarter ended Sept. 30 created an unrealized pretax loss of about $ 6 million in its risk arbitrage account . 
For the nine months , Jefferies said net fell 39 % , to $ 6.8 million , or $ 1.07 a share , from $ 11.1 million , or $ 1.50 a share . 
Revenue fell 3 % , to $ 105.2 million from $ 108.4 million . 
Sony Corp. , New York , said its bids for Columbia Pictures Entertainment Inc. and Guber-Peters Entertainment Co. have been cleared by federal antitrust regulators . 
The Japanese company said the waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino antitrust act for the $ 3.4 billion bid for Columbia and the $ 200 million offer for Guber-Peters expired Monday . 
Sony has agreed to buy both companies , but is in a legal battle with Warner Communications Inc. over the services of producers Peter Guber and Jon Peters . 
In a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission , Sony also said two more suits have been filed opposing the company 's agreement to buy Columbia . 
Sony added that a hearing has been set for Thursday in the Delaware Chancery Court in one of the suits . 
Thursday , October 19 , 1989 
The key U.S. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but do n't always represent actual transactions . 
PRIME RATE : 10 1\/2 % . 
The base rate on corporate loans at large U.S. money center commercial banks . 
FEDERAL FUNDS : 8 3\/4 % high , 8 5\/8 % low , 8 11\/16 % near closing bid , 8 11\/16 % offered . 
Reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $ 1 million or more . 
Source : Fulton Prebon ( U.S.A . ) Inc . 
DISCOUNT RATE : 7 % . 
The charge on loans to depository institutions by the New York Federal Reserve Bank . 
CALL MONEY : 9 3\/4 % to 10 % . 
The charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER placed directly by General Motors Acceptance Corp. : 8.45 % 30 to 44 days ; 8.25 % 45 to 73 days ; 8.325 % 74 to 99 days ; 7.75 % 100 to 179 days ; 7.50 % 180 to 270 days . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER : High-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $ 1,000 : 8.525 % 30 days ; 8.425 % 60 days ; 8.375 % 90 days . 
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT : 8.05 % one month ; 8.02 % two months ; 8 % three months ; 7.98 % six months ; 7.95 % one year . 
Average of top rates paid by major New York banks on primary new issues of negotiable C.D.s , usually on amounts of $ 1 million and more . 
The minimum unit is $ 100,000 . 
Typical rates in the secondary market : 8.60 % one month ; 8.60 % three months ; 8.45 % six months . 
BANKERS ACCEPTANCES : 8.45 % 30 days ; 8.32 % 60 days ; 8.32 % 90 days ; 8.17 % 120 days ; 8.08 % 150 days ; 7.98 % 180 days . 
Negotiable , bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order . 
LONDON LATE EURODOLLARS : 8 11\/16 % to 8 9\/16 % one month ; 8 11\/16 % to 8 9\/16 % two months ; 8 11\/16 % to 8 9\/16 % three months ; 8 5\/8 % to 8 1\/2 % four months ; 8 9\/16 % to 8 7\/16 % five months ; 8 9\/16 % to 8 7\/16 % six months . 
LONDON INTERBANK OFFERED RATES ( LIBOR ) : 8 3\/4 % one month ; 8 11\/16 % three months ; 8 9\/16 % six months ; 8 9\/16 % one year . 
The average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the London market based on quotations at five major banks . 
FOREIGN PRIME RATES : Canada 13.50 % ; Germany 8.50 % ; Japan 4.875 % ; Switzerland 8.50 % ; Britain 15 % . 
These rate indications are n't directly comparable ; lending practices vary widely by location . 
TREASURY BILLS : Results of the Monday , October 16 , 1989 , auction of short-term U.S. government bills , sold at a discount from face value in units of $ 10,000 to $ 1 million : 7.37 % 13 weeks ; 7.42 % 26 weeks . 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP . ( Freddie Mac ) : Posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days . 
9.87 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 7.875 % , 2 % rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION ( Fannie Mae ) : Posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days ( priced at par ) 9.81 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 8.70 % , 6\/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
MERRILL LYNCH READY ASSETS TRUST : 8.50 % . 
Annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days ; not a forecast of future returns . 
China said the question of Taiwan 's membership in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade should be considered only after China 's own membership in the 97-nation organization is restored . 
Both China and Taiwan are seeking seats in GATT , which sponsors trade-liberalizing agreements and sets world-commerce rules . 
`` As one of China 's provinces , Taiwan has no right to join GATT on its own , '' Foreign Ministry spokesman Li Zhaoxing said . 
China , under the Nationalist government of Chiang Kai-shek , was a founding member of GATT in 1947 . 
The Nationalists withdrew in 1950 , after their flight to Taiwan , and the Communist government in Beijing applied for restoration of China 's membership in July 1986 . 
The U.S. has voiced opposition to China 's bid for GATT membership , saying China has yet to undertake needed economic reforms . 
Japan 's biggest women 's underwear maker , Wacoal Corp. , said that it developed a sports car that it plans to market in two years . 
The `` Jiotto Caspita '' can run at over 188 miles an hour , a company spokesman said . 
The base price of the car is estimated at 30 million yen ( about $ 213,000 ) . 
Wacoal said it intends to produce the cars through a car manufacturer . 
Along with the car , Wacoal plans to launch a series of Caspita-brand men 's underwear . 
`` Our image is a company that makes women 's products , '' said a Wacoal spokesman . 
`` Now , we 're going to sell to men . '' 
The British satirical magazine Private Eye won an appeal against the size of a $ 960,000 libel award to Sonia Sutcliffe , the estranged wife of the `` Yorkshire Ripper '' mass murderer . 
An appeals-court panel slashed all but $ 40,000 from the award , the largest ever set by a British jury , pending a reassessment of the damages . 
But the panel dismissed the magazine 's contention that it had n't libeled Mrs. Sutcliffe when it accused her of trying to sell her story to capitalize on the notoriety of her husband . 
Private Eye had been threatened with closure because it could n't afford the libel payment . 
Senshukai Co. , a travel agent based in Osaka , Japan , announced that it and Nissho Iwai Corp. , a major Japanese trading house , will jointly build a 130-unit condominium in Queensland , Australia . 
Senshukai said the partners plan to rent to tourists but will also sell to interested parties . 
Senshukai has a 60 % stake in the venture and Nissho Iwai has the rest . 
Construction of the 34-floor building will begin next May and should be completed in April 1992 . 
Units will cost from 500,000 to 3.5 million Australian dollars ( about US$ 386,000 to US$ 2.7 million ) . 
The Soviet Union has halted construction of two Chernobyl-type nuclear reactors and is reassessing the future of 12 other existing reactors . 
Viktor Sidorenko , vice chairman of the State Committee on Nuclear Safety , said the two reactors were at Kursk and Smolensk . 
News of the halt comes amid growing anger in the Ukraine and Byelorussia over continuing high levels of radiation from Chernobyl . 
A former vice president of the Singapore branch of Drexel Burnham Lambert Group Inc. was charged in court yesterday on 19 counts of cheating . 
Francis Dang , 41 , is alleged to have been involved in cheating Drexel Burnham Lambert of up to 2.1 million Singapore dollars ( US$ 1.1 million ) by carrying out unauthorized transactions on the London Commodities Exchange and the International Petroleum Exchange . 
Mr. Dang is alleged to have used the account of Singapore hotel and property magnate Ong Beng Seng to effect the transactions . 
Japan says its economic growth will fall sharply if it cuts back on the use of oil , coal and gas to cap emissions of carbon dioxide . 
A Ministry of International Trade and Industry official said that a study found that Japan 's annual economic growth rate would eventually be only 0.8 % if carbon-dioxide emissions remained at this year 's level of 300 million tons . 
The study will support arguments against capping carbon-dioxide emissions that Japan will make at a U.N.-backed conference on atmospheric pollution next month . 
The study said Japan 's carbon-dioxide emissions would slightly more than double by 2010 unless the nation reduced its dependence on fossil fuels . 
It said that expanding nuclear-power capability is the quickest way to lessen that dependence . 
But increased reliance on nuclear power would meet stiff opposition from environmentalists , a second ministry official said . 
Just in time for Halloween , Britain 's Oxford University Press is publishing a `` Dictionary of Superstitions . '' 
The books 1,500 entries include stepping on cracks and knocking on wood ... . 
In New Zealand 's tiny township of Kaitaia , which has had direct dialing for less than a year , about 30 angry phone-company customers questioned the size of their bills . 
It turned out their children had been dialing a `` sex fantasy '' service in the U.S. . 
Slowing sales of its profitable Jeep Cherokee and Wagoneer sport utility vehicles are forcing Chrysler Corp. to temporarily idle its Toledo , Ohio , assembly plant for the first time since April 1986 . 
About 5,500 hourly workers will be laid off for a week beginning Oct. 23 , and overtime has been eliminated at the plant for the fourth quarter , a Chrysler spokesman said . 
That 's a significant change from earlier this year when the plant worked substantial overtime only to have sales fall short of the company 's bullish expectations . 
Sales of Cherokee , the best-selling Jeep , and the lower-volume Wagoneer were actually up about 10 % through the end of last month . 
But that 's less than Chrysler officials had hoped when they set ambitious production schedules for the Toledo plant earlier this year . 
Even when it became clear this spring that demand was n't coming up to expectations , Chrysler officials `` resisted '' cutting output because Cherokee and Wagoneer are `` very profitable vehicles , '' the spokesman said . 
Instead , Chrysler officials in late May slapped $ 1,000 cash rebates on the vehicles , including the first such incentives on the popular four-door Cherokee since Chrysler bought Jeep in 1987 . 
The incentives boosted sales for a while , but the pace had cooled by last month . 
The result : Chrysler dealers had a bloated 82-day supply of the Cherokee as of the end of last month and a 161-day supply of the Comanche pickup , which Toledo also builds . 
A 60-day to 65-day supply is considered normal . 
At Jasper Jeep-Eagle , one of the largest Jeep dealerships in the country , inventories have continued to swell . 
Steve Lowe , general manager of Jasper , Ga. , dealership , said new rebates of $ 500 to $ 1,000 on the models have stimulated sales , but not enough to significantly cut dealer stocks . 
`` If people are n't buying , you have to close plants , '' he said . 
Separately , Chrysler said it will idle for four weeks the St. Louis assembly plant that builds the Chrysler LeBaron and Dodge Daytona models . 
Chrysler officials said the plant is scheduled to resume production on Nov. 20. , and 3,300 hourly workers will be affected . 
General Motors Corp. , meanwhile , said it will idle for yet another week its Linden , N.J. , assembly plant , bringing to three weeks the total time that plant will be idled during October . 
GM said the assembly plant , which builds the Chevrolet Corsica and Beretta compact cars , originally was scheduled to reopen Monday but now will not resume production until Oct. 30 . 
The shutdown affects 3,000 workers and will cut output by about 4,320 cars . 
Sluggish sales of the Beretta and Corsica spurred GM to offer $ 800 rebates on those cars . 
The Corsica and Beretta make up the highest-volume car line at Chevrolet , but sales of the cars are off 9.6 % for the year , and fell a steep 34.2 % early this month . 
GM has scheduled overtime at its Lordstown , Ohio , and Janesville , Wis. , assembly plants , which build the Chevrolet Cavalier . 
Ford Motor Co. said it will shut down for one week its Kentucky Truck Plant because of a `` shortage of dealer orders . '' 
The shutdown will idle 2,000 hourly employees and eliminate production of about 1,300 medium and heavy duty trucks . 
The assembly plant is scheduled to resume production on Oct. 30 . 
Meanwhile , the nine major U.S. auto makers plan to build 143,178 cars this week , down 11.7 % from 162,190 a year ago and flat with last week 's 142,117 car output . 
f - Includes Chevrolet Prizm and Toyota Corolla . 
r - Revised . 
x - Year-to-date 1988 figure includes Volkswagen domestic-production through July . 
LOTUS DEVELOPMENT Corp. 's net income rose 61 % in the third quarter from the year-earlier period . 
Yesterday 's edition misstated the percentage increase . 
First Fidelity Bancorp. , Lawrenceville , N.J. , reported a 24 % drop in third-quarter profit , because of a decline in earning assets , lower loan volume and tighter interest margins . 
The bank holding company posted net income of $ 54.4 million , or 87 cents a share , including $ 1.7 million , or three cents a share , in one-time tax benefits . 
A year earlier , net was $ 71.6 million , or $ 1.22 a share . 
First Fidelity said non-performing assets increased to $ 482.3 million Sept. 30 from $ 393.1 million June 30 . 
The rise resulted from the transfer to non-accrual status of $ 96 million `` owed by two national borrowers and one local commercial real-estate customer , '' First Fidelity said . 
It said it does n't anticipate any loss of principal on two of the loans , comprising $ 85 million of these credits . 
First Fidelity said it boosted its loan-loss provision to $ 50.9 million from $ 20.4 million a year ago , primarily because of a weaker real-estate sector in the region . 
VIACOM Inc. 's loss narrowed to $ 21.7 million in the third quarter from $ 56.9 million a year ago . 
Thursday 's edition misstated the narrowing . 
Coastal Corp. said it signed a definitive agreement with Aruba to restart a 150,000-barrel-a-day oil refinery . 
Coastal would n't disclose the terms . 
Coastal , a Houston oil and gas company , said it expects to begin operations in October 1990 . 
The company said it may install additional processing units at the refinery to produce higher octane gasolines and other products . 
The company said it was leasing the site of the refinery from Aruba . 
Exxon Corp. built the plant but closed it in 1985 and sold off much of the equipment to dismantling contractors , from whom Coastal bought back much of the equipment . 
A Coastal spokesman said the biggest expense will be to refurbish the refinery but would n't say how much that would be . 
The prime minister of Aruba has said it could cost around $ 100 million . 
Coastal said the refinery 's expected daily production will include 34,000 barrels of jet fuel , 32,000 barrels of low-sulfur diesel fuel , 30,000 barrels of naphtha , 17,000 barrels of residual fuel oil , 8,000 barrels of asphalt and 25,000 barrels of low-sulfur catalytic cracker feedstock . 
Loral Corp. said fiscal second-quarter net income was $ 19.8 million , or 79 cents a share , compared with year-earlier earnings from continuing operations of $ 15.6 million , or 62 cents a share . 
Year-earlier net of $ 21 million , or 84 cents a share , included the results of Loral 's former Aircraft Braking Systems and Engineered Fabrics divisions , which were sold April 27 to the company 's chairman , Bernard L. Schwartz . 
The defense electronics concern attributed the operating improvement to higher profit margins and lower net interest expense . 
Loral also reported that its bookings more than doubled to $ 654 million in the quarter , ended Sept. 30 , from $ 257 million , in the year-before period . 
The increase was due mainly to a $ 325 million order from Turkey to equip its fleet of F-16 fighters with Loral 's ALQ-178 Rapport III electronic countermeasures system . 
The order is the biggest in the company 's history . 
Sales in the latest period edged up to $ 295.7 million from $ 293.9 million . 
Mr. Schwartz said the recent increase in orders `` puts us well on the way to our goal of $ 1.6 billion in bookings for the year . '' 
He added : `` I expect to see the earnings momentum we experienced this quarter continue for the rest of the year . '' 
Loral said it expects sales to accelerate in both the third and fourth quarters of this fiscal year . 
Loral 's profit from continuing operations for the first six months of fiscal 1990 was $ 36.4 million , or $ 1.44 a share , up 31 % from $ 27.8 million , or $ 1.11 a share , a year earlier . 
Net income fell 8.6 % to $ 37.1 million , or $ 1.43 a share , from $ 40.6 million , or $ 1.56 a share . 
Fiscal first-half sales slipped 3.9 % to $ 528.4 million from $ 549.9 million . 
Bookings for the first half totaled $ 813 million , compared with the $ 432 million recorded last year . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Loral closed at $ 33.25 , down 37.5 cents . 
HealthVest said two of its lenders have given it notices of default on bank loans and said they may take actions to recover their loans . 
HealthVest , an Austin , Texas , real estate investment trust , said that Chemical Bank , the lead bank under its domestic bank agreement , told it that if $ 3.3 million owed to the bank group is n't paid by today , the group will call the $ 120 million that HealthVest has outstanding under the credit line . 
The bank group also said that it wo n't make additional advances under the $ 150 million credit line . 
HealthVest missed a payment to the group that was due in late September . 
In addition , HealthVest said Bank of Tokyo Trust Co. also has notified it of a default and said it might take action to cure the default . 
HealthVest missed an interest payment to Bank of Tokyo on Oct. 1 . 
However , HealthVest said the Tokyo bank indicated that it wo n't accelerate HealthVest 's $ 50 million loan . 
HealthVest is in a severe liquidity bind because its affiliate , Healthcare International Inc. , has failed to make about $ 10.6 million in principal and interest payments owed since August . 
Healthcare operates many of the health-care properties that HealthVest owns . 
EMPIRE PENCIL , later called Empire-Berol , developed the plastic pencil in 1973 . 
Yesterday 's Centennial Journal misstated the company 's name . 
Storage Technology Corp. had net income of $ 8.3 million , or 32 cents a share , for its fiscal-third quarter ended Sept. 29 , almost 15 times the $ 557,000 , or two cents a share , it posted for the year-ago period . 
Storage , Louisville , Colo. , which makes data-storage devices for mainframe computers , said the huge increase in net reflects `` strong sales '' of its tape products , particularly the 4400 Automated Cartridge System , which holds a library of tape cartridges . 
The company said it recently sold its 750th cartridge system , which cost $ 400,000 to $ 500,000 each . 
Quarter revenue was $ 232.6 million , up 12 % from $ 206 million last year . 
The stock market reacted strongly to the news . 
Storage rose $ 1.125 a share , to close at $ 14 , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
For the nine months , Storage had net of $ 25.5 million , or 98 cents a share , including an $ 11.3 million extraordinary gain for the anticipated proceeds from liquidating an Irish unit . 
Net was up 69 % from $ 15.1 million , or 57 cents a share , last year . 
Revenue for the latest period was up 11 % to $ 682.7 million , from $ 614.6 million . 
A Canadian government agency conditionally approved proposed exports to the U.S. of natural gas from big , untapped fields in the Mackenzie River delta area of the western Canadian Arctic . 
Three companies , Esso Resources Canada Ltd. , Shell Canada Ltd. and Gulf Canada Resources Ltd. , applied to the Canadian National Energy Board to export 9.2 trillion cubic feet of Mackenzie delta natural gas over 20 years starting in 1996 . 
To be economically feasible , the 11 billion Canadian dollar ( US$ 9.37 billion ) project requires almost a doubling of natural gas export prices . 
It also faces numerous other hurdles including an agreement on a pipeline route for the gas . 
The board said the export licenses would be issued on the condition that Canadian interests would also be allowed to bid for the Mackenzie delta gas on terms similar to those offered to U.S. customers . 
U.S. buyers have already been lined up . 
They include Enron Corp. , Texas Eastern Corp. , Pacific Interstate Transmission Co. and Tennessee Gas Pipeline Co . 
The project could result in the U.S. taking more than 10 % of its natural gas supplies from Canada , up from about 5 % currently . 
It would bring 13 gas fields into production at a combined rate of about 1.2 billion cubic feet a day . 
The board estimated that the cost of building a pipeline from the Mackenzie delta to Alberta would be about C$ 5.9 million . 
It also said projections of surging U.S. demand for natural gas and price forecasts of C$ 5.25 per thousand cubic feet by 2005 would make the project economically viable . 
Esso , a unit of Imperial Oil Ltd. which is 71%-owned by Exxon Corp. , will be allowed to export 5.1 trillion cubic feet to the U.S. in the 20-year period . 
Shell , a subsidiary of Royal Dutch / Shell Group , will be allowed to export 0.9 trillion cubic feet , and Gulf , a unit of Olympia & York Developments Ltd. will be allowed to export 3.2 trillion cubic feet . 
Combustion Engineering Inc. , Stamford , Conn. , said it sold and agreed to sell several investments and nonstrategic businesses for about $ 100 million , which will be used for reducing debt and general purposes . 
The transactions are unrelated . 
The company agreed to sell its minority investments in makers of steam-generating and related equipment , Stein Industrie and Energie & Verfahrenstechnik , to the major shareholder in the companies , Dutch-based GEC Alsthom N.V . 
Combustion Engineering , which provides engineered products , systems and services for power generation , also sold Illinois Minerals Co. , based in Cairo , Ill . 
That unit of its Georgia Kaolin Co. subsidiary was sold to a unit of Unimin Corp . 
Assets of Construction Equipment International , Houston , were sold to Essex Crane Inc. , and the assets of Elgin Electronics , Erie , Pa. , were sold to closely held Charter Technologies Inc . 
Where do Americans put their money ? 
It depends on when you look . 
In 1900 , for instance , less than 8 % of assets went into bank deposits . 
That rose to nearly 18 % during the Depression , and has n't changed much since . 
Pension reserves , on the other hand , made up a relatively small part of household assets until the last decade , when they skyrocketed . 
And there has been a drastic decline in the importance of unincorporated business assets -- thanks to industry consolidation and a decline in family farms . 
That 's some of what emerges from the following charts , which show how Americans have changed their investment patterns over the past 90 years . 
Some results are self-explanatory . 
But other figures are surprising . 
Housing , for instance , has remained a fairly steady component of household assets over the past decade -- although common wisdom would have expected an increase . 
`` There is a lot of attention paid to housing as a form of household wealth , '' says Edward N. Wolff , professor of economics at New York University . 
`` But it has n't increased much relative to other assets . 
It suggests that households accumulate wealth across a broad spectrum of assets . 
And housing though it appears in the popular mind as being the major { growing } household asset , is n't . '' 
In addition , investors ' desire to hold stocks -- directly and through mutual funds -- has held surprisingly steady ; stocks ' importance among assets largely reflects the ups and downs of the stock market , and not a shift in stock-holding preferences . 
`` Stocks have not spread to the general public , despite the fact that the environment is much different , '' concludes Robert Avery , an economist at Cornell University . 
`` To me it says that despite all the views that we spend too much of our wealth on paper assets , we have ways of holding wealth similar to 100 years ago . '' 
-- The charts show how househld assets have been distributed over time . 
The main components of the various asseet categories : Housing : Primary home , but not the land it 's on . 
Land and Other Real Estate : Land on which primary home is built , investment property . 
Consumer Durables : Automobiles , appliances , furniture . 
Bank Deposits : Currency , checking-account deposits , small savings and time deposits , certificates of deposits , money-market fund shares . 
Bonds : Excludes bond funds . 
Stocks / Mutual Funds : Stocks and mutual funds other than money-market funds . 
Unincorporated Business : Partnerships and sole proprietorships , professional corporations . 
Pension Reserves : Holdings by pension funds . 
McCaw Cellular Communications Inc. said it sent a letter to LIN Broadcasting Corp. clarifying its revised tender offer for LIN and asking LIN to conduct `` a fair auction . '' 
The letter apparently came in response to a request for clarification by LIN earlier this week . 
LIN , which has agreed with BellSouth Corp. to merge their cellular-telephone businesses , said then that it would n't take a position on McCaw 's revised tender offer . 
Earlier this month , McCaw revised its offer to $ 125 a share for 22 million LIN shares . 
McCaw is seeking 50.3 % of the cellular and broadcasting concern ; the revised offer includes a feature requiring McCaw to begin an auction process in July 1994 that would buy out remaining holders at a per-share price roughly equivalent to what a third party might then have to pay for all of LIN . 
The letter outlines broad powers for an independent group of directors provided for in the revised offer . 
In a statement , Craig O. McCaw , chairman and chief executive officer of McCaw , said : `` We trust LIN will take no further actions that favor BellSouth . '' 
McCaw said the three independent directors provided for in the offer would be designated by the current board . 
The successors would be nominated by the independent directors . 
LIN would have a priority right to pursue all opportunities to acquire U.S. cellular interests in markets other than those in which McCaw holds an interest , or which are contiguous to those markets , unless LIN has an interest there or contiguous to it . 
Independent directors would have veto rights to any acquisition if they unanimously decide it is n't in LIN 's best interest . 
Independent directors would be able to block transactions they unanimously deem would be likely to depress the private market value of LIN at the time it is to be sold in five years . 
If LIN is put up for sale rather than purchased by McCaw in five years , McCaw wo n't submit a bid unless the independent directors request it , and the independent directors will run the bidding . 
The directors would be able to sell particular assets to enable such buyers as the regional Bell operating companies to purchase the company 's interests . 
MCA Inc. said third-quarter net fell 6.3 % to $ 50.8 million , or 69 cents a share , from $ 54.3 million , or 74 cents a share , a year earlier . 
MCA said revenue rose 14 % to $ 918.4 million from $ 806.7 million . 
The entertainment concern said the success of several movies released during the quarter , including `` Parenthood '' and `` Uncle Buck , '' contributed to record revenue for its film unit . 
Both MCA 's music-entertainment and book-publishing units also posted record revenue and operating profit . 
The parent company 's net included a loss -- which it did n't specify -- that was related to the company 's 50 % stake in Cineplex Odeon Corp . 
Cineplex , a Toronto theater chain , had a second-quarter net loss of $ 38.7 million . 
MCA said net also included certain reserves related to the restructuring of its LJN Toys ' international operations . 
These items were partly offset , MCA said , by an unspecified gain on the sale of its Miller International unit , a maker and distributor of budget-priced audio cassettes . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , MCA rose $ 1.50 to $ 64 . 
In the nine months , net rose 35 % to $ 120.1 million , or $ 1.64 a share , from $ 89.2 million , or $ 1.22 a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue increased 22 % to $ 2.5 billion from $ 2.1 billion . 
Past Due Impasse 
I never pay my bills Till the very last day ; I lose far less interest By proceeding that way . 
But it all evens out , It 's so easy to see : Not till the last moment Am I paid what 's due me . 
-- Arnold J. Zarett . 
Rex Tremendae 
The effete Tyrannosaurus Rex Had strict Cretaceous views on sex , And that is why you only see him Reproduced in the museum . 
-- Laurence W. Thomas . 
Helmsley Enterprises Inc. plans to close its company-owned insurance business and is seeking other brokers to take over its policies , according to individuals familiar with the New York firm . 
Helmsley Enterprises is the umbrella organization for companies controlled by Harry B. Helmsley . 
These include office and residential real estate giant , HelmsleySpear Inc. , and Helmsley Hotels . 
The insurance brokerage agency , just a fragment of Helmsley 's vast empire , would be the first piece of the company to be stripped away since last summer when Mr. Helmsley 's wife , Leona Helmsley , was found guilty of tax evasion . 
Industry sources estimate the agency brokers property and casualty premiums worth about $ 25 million annually , and has revenue , based on a standard 10 % commission rate , of about $ 2.5 million . 
The insurance firm acts as a broker on policies covering buildings managed by HelmsleySpear and others . 
Many of the properties are owned through limited partnerships controlled by Mr. Helmsley . 
New York State law prohibits insurance brokerages from deriving more than 10 % of revenue from insuring affiliated companies . 
Helmsley 's insurance division had slightly exceeded that percentage , sources say , but the division was n't considered significant enough to the company to be restructured , particularly at a difficult time for the firm . 
Adverse publicity from the scandal surrounding its founder 's wife and related management strife have put pressure on the entire Helmsley organization . 
However , individuals close to the company insist shuttering the insurance division , a sideline from the company 's core property management business , is n't the beginning of a sale of assets . 
Helmsley 's insurance premiums are expected to be transferred to several different insurance brokerage companies . 
Frank B. Hall Inc. of Briarcliff Manor , N.Y. is reportedly working out an agreement with Helmsley . 
Officials there declined to comment , as did Helmsley management . 
Outside the white-walled headquarters of the socalled Society of Orange Workers , all seems normal in South Africa 's abnormal society . 
A pickup truck driven by a white farmer rumbles past with a load of black workers bouncing in the back . 
Over at Conradies , the general store , a black stock boy scurries to help an elderly white woman with her packages . 
Down the street , a car pulls into the Shell station and is surrounded by black attendants . 
But inside the white walls of the Orange Workers ' office -- just about the largest building in town , save for the Dutch Reformed Church and the school -- South Africa 's neat racial order is awry . 
A dozen white office workers fold newsletters and stuff them into envelopes . 
White women serve tea and coffee , and then wash the cups and saucers afterwards . 
White children empty the wastepaper baskets and squeegee the windows . 
There is n't a black worker in sight . 
Not in the kitchen , or the storeroom or the book shop . 
`` If we want to have our own nation , then we must be willing to do all the work ourselves , '' says Hendrik Verwoerd Jr. , son of the former prime minister and the leader of the Orange Workers , founded in 1980 . 
They do indeed want their own nation . 
The pillars of apartheid may be trembling in the rest of South Africa , with Johannesburg opening its public facilities to all races , blacks storming the all-white beaches of the Cape and the government releasing seven leaders of the banned African National Congress . 
But here in Morgenzon , a sleepy town amid the corn fields of the eastern Transvaal , the Orange Workers are holding the pillars steady . 
The Orange Workers -- who take their name from William of Orange of the Netherlands , a hero of the Dutch-descended Afrikaners -- believe that the solution to South Africa 's racial problems is n't the abolition of apartheid , it 's the perfection of apartheid -- complete and total separation of the races . 
Here , then , is where the Orange Workers have come to make apartheid 's last stand . 
Their idea is to create a city , first , and then an entire nation -- without blacks . 
This may seem to be a preposterous and utterly futile effort in Africa . 
And the fact that there are only 3,000 card-carrying Orange Workers may put them on the loony fringe . 
But their ideal of an Afrikaner homeland , an all-white reserve to be carved out of present-day South Africa , is a mainstream desire of the right-wing , which embraces about one-third of the country 's five million whites . 
Afrikaner philosophers and theologians have long ruminated on the need for a white homeland . 
The Orange Workers are just putting this preaching into practice . 
Thus , farmer Johan Fischer , his T-shirt and jeans covered in grease , crawls around under his planter , tightening bolts and fixing dents . 
On almost every other farm in South Africa , black workers do the repairs . 
But not here . 
Mr. Fischer plows his own fields , sows his own corn and sunflowers , and feeds his own sheep . 
Over at the fiberglass factory , four white workers assemble water tanks on their own , and in their spare time they build townhouses across the road . 
On Main Street , Alida Verwoerd and her daughters look after the clothes and fabric shop , then hurry home to fix lunch for the rest of the family . 
Down by the stream , a group of Orange Workers puts the finishing touches on a golf course . 
If whites want to play there by themselves , says consulting engineer Willem van Heerden , whites should also build it by themselves . 
`` If we want to survive as a people , '' he says , `` we have to change our way of life . 
The Afrikaner must end his reliance on others . '' 
In their quest to perfect apartheid , the Orange Workers have discovered a truth that most of privileged white South Africa tries mightily to deny : The master ca n't become dependent on the slave and expect to remain master forever . 
`` If apartheid means you want cheap black labor and all the comforts that go with it , but you also want to exclude the blacks from social and political integration , then these are two contradictions that ca n't go on forever , '' says Mr. Verwoerd . 
He is sitting in his living room , beneath a huge portrait of his late father , Hendrik F. Verwoerd , apartheid 's architect and South African prime minister from 1958 to 1966 . 
Somewhere , the son sighs , things went terribly wrong with apartheid ; today , whites even rely on blacks to police their separation . 
`` People took separate development as an opportunity to use black labor without ever getting rid of it . 
But my father meant it to mean real separation , '' says the son . 
The Orange Workers speak sincerely . 
`` We agree with world opinion that the status quo in South Africa is morally wrong , '' says Pieter Bruwer , the Orange Workers ' chief scribe and pamphleteer . 
`` We must either integrate honestly or segregate honestly . '' 
Morgenzon has long been a special domain of Afrikanerdom . 
According to Mr. Verwoerd , the early Afrikaner pioneers were the first people to settle in the eastern Transvaal , even before the blacks . 
Then , when Morgenzon was incorporated in 1908 , the farmer who owned the land stipulated that only whites could reside in town ; blacks could work there , but they had to leave at night . 
Today , Morgenzon is a town of 800 whites and two paved roads . 
Weeds push up through the cracks in the sidewalks , and many houses and storefronts are empty . 
There are few factories and no mines . 
It was an ideal place for the Orange Workers to start their new nation , unencumbered by the demographics that have undermined apartheid elsewhere in South Africa . 
So far , about 150 Orange Workers have moved here , spending nearly $ 1 million buying up property over the past three years . 
Still , complete and total segregation remains elusive . 
Just beyond the city limits is a shantytown of 2,000 blacks who are employed throughout the area . 
Despite the Orange Workers ' intention to put them all out of work , they are in no hurry to leave . 
A young man called July ( that 's when he was born ) , who works at the railroad station just up the street from the Orange Workers office , points at the whitewalled building and says matter-of-factly , `` We 're not allowed in there , that 's all I know . '' 
The 650-or-so local whites who are n't Orange Workers are more troubled . 
Try as they might , they just ca n't conceive of life without black workers . 
`` Impossible , impossible , '' say the Conradies , an elderly couple who have run the general store for decades . 
`` We ca n't do without their help , '' says Mrs. Conradie . 
`` Oh no . 
We need them and I thank God for them . '' 
Over at the Shell station , owner Rudi van Dyk , who doubles as Morgenzon 's mayor , worries that the Orange Workers have made his town the laughingstock of the nation . 
`` What they want us to do just is n't practical , '' he says , noting that he employs 16 blacks . 
`` I could n't afford to hire 16 whites . 
The only Afrikaners who would be willing to work for this salary would n't know how to handle money . '' 
Back at the Verwoerd house , Hendrik Sr. peers down over the shoulder of Hendrik Jr . 
The son believes that when the Afrikaners finally realize there is no turning back the integration of South African society and politics , Morgenzon will boom . 
`` We urge our people not to wait until they have to fight for their own nation , '' says Mr. Verwoerd . 
`` By populating a place now , we make ourselves a power any new government will have to take into account . '' 
Curiously , he compares the Orange Workers to the ANC , which his father outlawed in 1960 . 
`` The ANC wo n't be stopped until there is a provision for black aspirations , '' says Mr. Verwoerd . 
`` Likewise , no government will stop this idea of the Afrikaners . '' 
He apologizes for sounding pushy . 
`` Look , '' he says , `` If the rest of South Africa wants to have an integrated melting pot , that 's their choice . 
We 'll leave them alone . 
We just want to have our own cup of tea . '' 
And they will even serve it themselves . 
Okay , now you can pick up that phone . 
But do n't do anything rash . 
After last Friday 's stock-market plunge , investment professionals cautioned people to resist the urge to call their brokers and sell stocks . 
Not selling into a panic turned out to be very good advice : Despite the market 's volatility , the Dow Jones Industrial Average has surged 114 points in the past four days . 
Now , with a semblance of normalcy returning , some advisers say it 's time for investors to take a hard , cold look at the stocks they own and consider some careful pruning . 
`` The market is sending nervous signals , '' says Peter J. Canelo , chief market strategist for Bear , Stearns & Co. , and it 's `` unwise '' to be overcommitted to stocks . 
Alan Weston , president of Weston Capital Management , a Los Angeles money-management firm , adds that in periods of uncertainty like today , `` it 's a good time to cut out the dead branches of your portfolio . '' 
Not everybody agrees that it 's time to trim . 
`` We are n't inclined to prune stock portfolios now , '' says Steven G. Einhorn , chairman of the investment policy committee of Goldman , Sachs & Co . 
`` Investors should stay with their stocks . 
We expect a choppy and sloppy market for a short period , but we do n't think it will be ugly . 
The downside is limited . '' 
And even those who say some selective selling may be in order stress that individuals need to be in the stock market to achieve their long-term investment objectives and to help balance their other assets . 
Any selling , they say , should be well thought-out , and executed gradually , during market rallies . 
They offer these suggestions : 
GET RID OF THE DOGS . 
`` Sell stocks that are n't doing well now , and that do n't have good earnings prospects , '' says Alfred Goldman , technical analyst at St. Louis-based A.G. Edwards & Sons . 
`` Most people do just the opposite : They sell their winners and keep their losers . '' 
Which types of stocks are most likely to qualify ? 
Technology stocks , says Mr. Goldman . 
WATCH FOR EARNINGS DISAPPOINTMENTS . 
A company does n't have to post a loss to be a candidate for sale , says Charles I. Clough Jr. , chief market strategist at Merrill Lynch & Co . 
If earnings do n't live up to analysts ' expectations , he says , that 's enough to dump the stock . 
John Markese , director of research for the American Association of Individual Investors , raises a cautionary note . 
`` Substituting a rule of thumb for your own judgment '' can be a mistake , he says . 
An earnings disappointment may reflect a situation that 's short-term . 
But Mr. Clough says , `` The risk is that earnings disappointments will continue . '' 
The economy is decelerating after six good years , and `` right now it 's better to shoot first and ask questions later . '' 
Which types of stocks currently have the greatest earnings risks ? 
Computer companies ; commodity cyclical stocks , like autos ; and retailing stocks , he says . 
BEWARE OF HEAVY DEBT . 
The companies apt to run into earnings problems soonest are the ones with heavy debt loads , says Larry Biehl , partner in the San Mateo , Calif. , money-management firm of Bailard , Biehl & Kaiser . 
Mr. Canelo of Bear Stearns agrees : `` If we do have an economic slowdown , '' he says , `` companies with high debt ratios will be dumped en masse . '' 
The best course for individual investors is to sell these stocks now , the two advisers say . 
SELL ` WHISPER ' STOCKS . 
UAL Corp. 's difficulty in obtaining bank financing for its leveraged buy-out and its resulting price plunge is a tip-off to what 's going to happen to `` takeover stocks , '' says Mr. Canelo . 
Takeover activity will slow down as more and more banks tighten their lending requirements , he says . 
`` There 'll be fewer and fewer deals . '' 
Moreover , many financial advisers say individuals should be in the stock market as long-term investors , not as traders trying to catch the next hot stock . 
In general , they say , avoid takeover stocks . 
COMPARE P / E RATIOS WITH PROSPECTS . 
Mr. Canelo suggests that investors compare price / earnings ratios ( the price of a share of stock divided by a company 's per-share earnings for a 12-month period ) with projected growth rates . 
`` If you think earnings will grow at 20 % a year , it 's all right to pay 20 times earnings , '' he says . 
`` But do n't pay 30 times earnings for a company that 's expected to grow at 15 % a year . '' 
Mr. Canelo thinks the market will probably go higher , but `` will be ruthless with stocks if the earnings are n't there . '' 
Mr. Markese cautions that investors should n't slavishly follow any specific price / earnings sell trigger . 
`` If you say sell anytime a company 's price / earnings ratio exceeds 15 , that knocks out all your growth stocks , '' he says . 
`` You eliminate companies with substantial prospects that are moving up in price . '' 
EXAMINE WHAT HAS CHANGED . 
Tom Schlesinger , market analyst at A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc. , says investors should consider selling if there has been a fundamental change in a company since they bought its stock . 
Say you purchased a stock because of a new product that was in the works . 
Now , because of various difficulties , the product has been scrapped . 
Time to sell , says Mr. Schlesinger . 
Similarly , he says , suppose you were attracted to a company because of expectations that sales would hit $ 200 million by 1990 . 
If things have n't worked out that well , and sales wo n't hit $ 200 million until 1992 , it 's time to consider selling , he says . 
USX Corp. declined a United Steelworkers request for a reopening of its four-year labor contract that is due to expire Jan. 31 , 1991 . 
The union on Oct. 5 requested that the contract be reopened to restore all pay and benefits that the union gave up in the 1982-83 and 1986-87 rounds of bargaining . 
A United Steelworkers spokeman said Lynn Williams , the union 's president , was out of town . 
The union wo n't respond to the USX statement until Mr. Williams has studied it , the spokesman said . 
Robert A. Oswald , chief financial officer and a director of this natural-gas pipeline company , was elected to the additional position of executive vice president . 
In addition , Michael W. O'Donnell , executive vice president of a Columbia unit , was named assistant chief financial officer and a senior vice president of the parent company . 
The appointments take effect Nov. 1 . 
Both men are 44 years old . 
This magazine and book publisher said three men were elected directors , increasing the board to 10 . 
They are : James R. Eiszner , 62 years old and chairman and chief executive officer of CPC International Inc. ; Robert G. Schwartz , 61 , chairman , president and chief executive officer of Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. , and Walter V. Shipley , 53 , chairman and chief executive officer of Chemical Banking Corp . 
BankAmerica Corp. reported a 34 % jump in third-quarter earnings , as its rocket-like recovery from nearly ruinous losses several years ago continued to be fueled by growth in consumer loans , higher interest margins and negligible loan losses . 
For the quarter , BankAmerica said it earned $ 254 million , or $ 1.16 a share , compared with $ 190 million , or 97 cents a share , a year earlier . 
BankAmerica spokesmen said preliminary reports indicate the company was n't materially affected by the Tuesday earthquake . 
All but eight of the 850 branches , which had some structural damage , reopened yesterday for business . 
Automated teller machine operations also were up and operating yesterday , a bank spokesman said . 
For the first time in nearly two years , BankAmerica results failed to improve in consecutive quarters , but the decline from the second quarter was attributable to special factors . 
Third-quarter profit was 16 % below the $ 304 million , or $ 1.50 a share , earned in the 1989 second quarter . 
The company cited higher tax credits in the second quarter , totaling $ 63 million , compared with $ 28 million in the third quarter . 
Excluding tax credits , profit was 6 % below the second quarter . 
But that drop was caused entirely by a decline in Brazilian interest paid , to $ 5 million from $ 54 million the second quarter . 
Moreover , BankAmerica continued to build its reserve against troubled foreign loans by boosting its loan-loss provision to $ 170 million , about the same as the previous quarter but well above the $ 100 million in the year-earlier quarter . 
The provision rate was far above BankAmerica 's actual net credit losses of $ 24 million in the third quarter , compared with $ 18 million in the second period and $ 38 million a year earlier . 
As a result , BankAmerica said its reserve against troubled foreign-country loans , once below 25 % , now amounts to 45 % of the $ 6.4 billion of non-trade debt it calculates it is owed by those nations . 
That level is about the same as some other big banks , but far below the 85 % and 100 % reserves of Bankers Trust New York Corp. and J.P. Morgan & Co. , respectively . 
By any measure , third-quarter earnings were still robust , equivalent to a 0.92 % return on assets even excluding tax credits . 
By that key measure of operating efficiency , BankAmerica turned in a better performance than its well-regarded Los Angeles-based competitor , Security Pacific Corp. , which posted a 0.89 % return in the third quarter . 
But it continued to badly trail its San Francisco neighbor , Wells Fargo & Co. , which reported an extraordinary 1.25 % return on assets . 
Both returns do n't include any tax credits . 
`` They { BankAmerica } continue to show good performance , '' said Donald K. Crowley , an analyst with Keefe , Bruyette & Woods Inc. , San Francisco . 
In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange , BankAmerica common stock edged up 12.5 cents to close at $ 32 a share . 
Shareholder equity improved to 4.68 % from 4.23 % in the previous quarter . 
The 4.52 % net interest margin , or the difference between the yield on a bank 's investments and the rate it pays for deposits and other borrowings , was still markedly higher than the 3.91 % ratio a year earlier , and is among the best in the industry , analysts said . 
The high margin partly stems from continued strong growth in high-yielding consumer loans , which jumped 31 % to $ 17.47 billion from a year earlier , and residential mortgages , which rose 25 % to $ 12 billion . 
BankAmerica 's total loans rose 8 % to $ 71.36 billion . 
For the nine months , BankAmerica profit soared 81 % to $ 833 million , or $ 4.07 a share , from $ 461 million , or $ 2.40 a share . 
International Business Machines Corp. will announce on Tuesday a slew of software products aimed at eliminating some of the major problems involved in computerizing manufacturing operations , industry executives said . 
Many plant floors currently resemble a Tower of Babel , with computers , robots and machine tools that generally speak their own language and have trouble talking to each other . 
As a result , if a problem develops on a production line , it is unlikely some supervisor sitting in front of a personal computer or workstation will know about it or be able to correct it . 
So IBM will be announcing more than 50 products that will be aimed at letting even the dumbest machine tool talk to the smartest mainframe , or anything in between . 
In an unusual display of openness , IBM also will be helping customers tie together operations that include lots of equipment made by IBM 's competitors . 
In addition , the executives said IBM will be offering programming tools designed to let anyone working on a factory floor write ad-hoc software , for instance , to do statistical analysis that would pinpoint a problem on a manufacturing line . 
In Armonk , N.Y. , an IBM spokeswoman confirmed that IBM executives will be announcing some computer-integrated-manufacturing plans next week but declined to elaborate . 
The industry executives said that , as usual with such broad announcements from IBM , this one will be part reality and part strategy . 
So it will take many quarters for IBM to roll out all the products that customers need , and it will take years for customers to integrate the products into their operations . 
Also as usual , the products will appeal mostly to heavy users of IBM equipment , at least initially . 
Still , consultants and industry executives said the products could help make manufacturing operations more efficient , and provide a boost to the computer-integrated-manufacturing market -- a market that Yankee Group , a research firm , has said may double to $ 40 billion by 1993 . 
`` This is a step in the right direction , '' said Martin Piszczalski , a Yankee Group analyst . 
He added , though , that `` a lot of this is intentions ... . 
We 'll have to wait and see '' how the plan develops . 
The announcements also should help IBM go on the offensive against Digital Equipment Corp. on the plant floor . 
While IBM has traditionally dominated the market for computers on the business side of manufacturing operations and has done well in the market for design tools , Digital has dominated computerized manufacturing . 
Hewlett-Packard Co. also has begun to gain share in the whole computer-integrated-manufacturing arena . 
IBM will face an uphill climb against Digital , given Digital 's reputation for being better than IBM at hooking together different manufacturers ' computers . 
In addition , Hewlett-Packard , while a much smaller player , has made a big commitment to the sorts of industry standards that facilitate those hookups and could give IBM some problems . 
Both can be expected to go after the market aggressively : Gartner Group Inc. , a research firm , estimated the Digital gets 30 % of its revenue from the manufacturing market , and Hewlett-Packard gets 50 % . 
IBM , which Gartner Group said generates 22 % of its revenue in this market , should be able to take advantage of its loyal following among buyers of equipment . 
That is because many companies will standardize on certain types of equipment as the various parts of the manufacturing market merge , and IBM is the biggest player . 
But much will depend on how quickly IBM can move . 
The whole idea of computer-integrated manufacturing , CIM , seems to be making a comeback after losing a little luster over the past couple of years when it became apparent that it was n't a panacea that would make U.S. plants more efficient and banish foreign competition . 
Erik Keller , a Gartner Group analyst , said organizational changes may still be required to really take advantage of CIM 's capabilities -- someone on the shop floor may not like having someone in an office using a personal computer to look over his shoulder , for instance , and may be able to prevent that from happening . 
But he said a system such as IBM 's should help significantly . 
In making polyethylene sheets out of plastic chips , for instance , a chip sometimes does n't melt , gets caught in the machinery and creates a run in the sheets . 
That can be expensive , because the problem may not be noticed for a while , and the sheets are typically thrown away . 
But Mr. Keller said that , if computers can be integrated into the process , they could alert an operator as soon as the problem occurred . 
They could also check through the orders on file to find a customer that was willing to accept a lower grade of polyethylene . 
The computer would let the machine run just until that order was filled , eliminating waste . 
This sort of improved link figures to eventually become a significant weapon for some companies . 
Companies might be able to tell salespeople daily , for instance , about idle equipment , so they could offer discounts on whatever that equipment produces . 
Salespeople also could get a precise reading on when products could be delivered -- in much the same way that Federal Express has marketed its ability to tell exactly where a package is in the delivery system . 
Ford Motor Co. 's Merkur , the company 's first new car franchise in the U.S. since the Edsel was unveiled in 1957 , now will share Edsel 's fate . 
Ford said yesterday it will halt imports of the Merkur Scorpio , a $ 28,000 luxury sedan built by Ford of Europe in West Germany . 
The cars are sold under a separate franchise with its own sign in front of Lincoln-Mercury dealers -- as opposed to new models such as Taurus or Escort , which are sold under existing Ford divisions . 
The move to halt imports -- announced 29 years and 11 months to the day after Henry Ford II declared that the Edsel division and its gawky car would be scrapped -- kills the four-year-old Merkur brand in the U.S. market . 
It will continue to be sold in the European market . 
Merkur 's death is n't nearly as costly to Ford as was the Edsel debacle , because Merkur was a relatively low-budget project with limited sales goals . 
Still , Merkur 's demise is a setback for Ford at a time when the company 's image as the U.S. auto maker with the golden touch is showing signs of strain . 
The No. 2 auto maker 's new Thunderbird and Mercury Cougar models have n't met sales expectations in the year since they were introduced , and Ford 's trucks are losing ground to their GM rivals . 
This fall , Ford introduced only one new product : A restyled version of its hulking Lincoln Town Car luxury model . 
The demise of Merkur ( pronounced mare-COOR ) comes after a September in which 670 Merkur dealers managed to sell only 93 Scorpios . 
Total Merkur sales for the first nine months dropped 46 % from a year ago to just 6,320 cars . 
Merkur is n't the only European luxury brand having problems in the U.S. . 
The Japanese assault on the luxury market is rapidly overshadowing such European makes as Audi and Saab , which at least have clear brand images . 
Merkur , as an import on domestic car lots , suffered from the same sort of image confusion that is hobbling sales of imports at General Motors Corp. and Chrysler Corp . 
Merkur was originally aimed at enticing into Lincoln-Mercury dealerships the kind of young , affluent buyers who would n't be caught dead in a Town Car -- a vehicle so bargelike that Ford is staging a press event next month linking the Town Car 's launch to the commissioning of a new aircraft carrier in Norfolk , Va . 
But the brand had trouble from the start . 
The first Merkur , the XR4Ti , went on sale in early 1985 . 
The sporty coupe foundered in part because American buyers did n't go for the car 's unusual double-wing rear spoiler . 
In May 1987 , Ford began importing the Scorpio sedan from West Germany to sell next to a redesigned XR4Ti in showrooms . 
Ford officials said they expected the two Merkurs would sell about 15,000 cars a year , and in 1988 they reached that goal , as sales hit 15,261 cars . 
It was downhill from there , however . 
One major factor was the decline of the dollar against the mark , which began less than a year after Merkur 's 1985 launch . 
As the West German currency rose , so did Merkur prices . 
The Merkur cars also suffered from spotty quality , some dealers say . 
`` It was like a comedy of errors , '' says Martin J. `` Hoot '' McInerney , a big dealer whose Star Lincoln-Mercury-Merkur operation in Southfield , Mich. , sold more XR4Ti 's than any other dealership . 
But by the third quarter of 1988 , Scorpios had a high satisfaction rating in internal Ford studies , a spokesman said . 
Apparently , however , the improvement came too late . 
Last fall , Ford announced it would discontinue the XR4Ti in the U.S. at the end of the 1989 model year . 
Ford said then it would keep the Scorpio . 
This year , Scorpio sales plummeted , and at the current sales pace it would take Ford 242 days to sell off the current Scorpio inventory of about 4,600 cars . 
Canadian Pacific Ltd. said it proposed acquiring the 44 % of Soo Line Corp. it does n't already own for $ 19.50 a share , or about $ 81.9 million , after failing to find a buyer for its majority stake earlier this year . 
Soo Line said its board appointed a special committee of independent directors to study the proposal . 
The troubled Minneapolis-based railroad concern said the committee has the authority to hire financial and legal advisers to assist it . 
The proposed acquisition will be subject to approval by the Interstate Commerce Commission , Soo Line said . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Soo Line shares jumped well above the proposed price , closing at $ 20.25 , up $ 2.75 . 
Canadian Pacific put its 56 % stake in Soo Line up for sale last year but could n't find any takers . 
Canadian Pacific , which has interests in transportation , telecommunications , forest products , energy and real estate , finally took its majority block off the market this spring . 
`` It turned out we could n't sell it , '' a Canadian Pacific official said , adding that acquiring the remainder of Soo Line is now `` the best way to rationalize operations . '' 
Canadian Pacific is Soo Line 's biggest customer and has owned a majority stake in the U.S. railroad since 1947 . 
Canadian Pacific and Soo Line tracks connect at two points in the West on the Canada-U.S. border and the two companies operate a very successful Chicago-Montreal rail service . 
Separately , for the first nine months , Soo Line reported a loss of $ 398,000 , or four cents a share , compared with net income of $ 12.5 million , or $ 1.32 a share , a year earlier . 
Revenue fell 5.8 % to $ 407.9 million from $ 433.2 million . 
The company had a loss from operations of $ 1.7 million . 
Golden Nugget Inc. reported a third-quarter net loss of $ 13.1 million , or 76 cents a share , based on 17.2 million common shares and dilutive equivalents outstanding . 
The results compare with a year-earlier net loss of $ 1.5 million , or seven cents a share , based on 20.3 million common and dilutive equivalents outstanding . 
Operating revenue rose 25 % to $ 52.1 million from $ 41.8 million a year ago . 
Results for the latest quarter include nonoperating items of $ 23.9 million , versus $ 8.4 million a year earlier . 
Most of the expenses stem from the company 's huge Mirage resort-casino scheduled to open next month along the Strip , and an April 1989 financing by units operating the downtown Golden Nugget property . 
For the nine months , Golden Nugget reported a net loss of $ 11.4 million , or 69 cents a share , based on 16.6 million common and dilutive equivalents outstanding . 
The year earlier , the company had a net loss of $ 4.3 million , or 20 cents a share , based on 21 million common shares and dilutive equivalents outstanding . 
The 1988 results include a $ 10.7 million charge stemming from a litigation judgment . 
Separately , the casino operator said its board approved a plan to buy-back as many as three million common shares from time to time , either in the open market or through private transactions . 
An additional 299,000 shares are authorized for repurchase under an earlier stock buy-back program . 
John Uphoff , an analyst with Raymond James & Associates , said the results were n't surprising , and attributed the buy-back to management 's confidence in the Mirage 's ability to generate strong cash flow in 1990 . 
Yesterday , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Golden Nugget common closed at $ 28.25 , up $ 2 . 
Capital Holding Corp. said it requested and received the resignation of John A. Franco , its vice chairman , as an officer and a director of the life insurance holding company . 
The company said Mr. Franco developed a plan to establish a business that might be competitive with Capital Holding Corp. 's Accumulation and Investment Group , which Mr. Franco headed . 
The group temporarily will report to Irving W. Bailey II , chairman , president and chief executive officer of Capital Holding . 
Mr. Franco , 47 years old , said in a telephone interview that he has been considering and discussing a number of possible business ventures , but that `` nothing is at a mature stage . '' 
He said he `` did n't argue with '' the company 's decision to seek his resignation because contemplating outside business ventures can distract an executive from performing his best `` at the job he is paid to do . '' 
Martin H. Ruby , a managing director of Capital Holding 's Accumulation and Investment Group , also resigned to pursue other business interests , Capital Holding said . 
Mr. Ruby , 39 , said that he had `` an amicable parting '' with Capital Holding and that he has `` a number of ventures in the financial-services area '' under consideration . 
He said that his resignation was a mutual decision with Capital Holding management , but that he was n't actually asked to resign . 
The Accumulation and Investment Group is responsible for the investment operations of all Capital Holding 's insurance businesses and markets guaranteed investment contracts to bank trust departments and other institutions . 
It also sells single-premium annuities to individuals . 
Mr. Bailey said he expects to name a new group president to head that operation following the Nov. 8 board meeting . 
@ 
Money Market Deposits - a 6.23 % 
a - Average rate paid yesterday by 100 large banks and thrifts in the 10 largest metropolitan areas as compiled by Bank Rate Monitor . 
b - Current annual yield . 
Guaranteed minimum 6 % . 
( During its centennial year , The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history . ) 
PLASTIC PENCILS , CODE-NAMED E-71 , made their hush-hush debut in children 's pencil boxes at five-and-dime stores in 1973 . 
But few knew it then and most still think all pencils are wooden . 
Eagle Pencil of Shelbyville , Tenn. , `` Pencil City U.S.A. , '' had made its earliest pilot plastic pencils in 1971 . 
But it was n't until after it hired Arthur D. Little , a Cambridge , Mass. , research concern , that its new product was refined for commercial sale in 1973 . 
Three A.D.L. inventors applied April 6 , 1973 , for the patent , which was assigned and awarded in 1976 to Hasbro Industries , then Eagle 's parent . 
Pencil pushers chew and put the plastic models behind their ears just like traditional pencils made of glued strips of California incense cedar filled with ceramic lead . 
It takes five steps to make standard pencils , just one for the plastic type . 
Automated machines coextrude long plastic sheaths with graphite-plastic cores that are printed , cut , painted and eraser-fitted . 
`` After more than 200 years , something new has happened to pencils , '' said Arthur D. Little in a 1974 report that publicly described the previously secret item . 
Eagle 's plastic type sharpens and looks like a wooden pencil . 
A major difference is that a snapped wooden pencil will have a slivered break while a plastic model will break cleanly . 
The softness of the core constrains the plastic models to No. 1 , No. 2 or No. 3-type pencils , which account for the bulk of the market . 
Artists and draftsmen need harder `` leads . '' 
Eagle , now called Eagle-Berol , remains a leading company among the 10 in the U.S. that produced about 2.3 billion pencils last year , according to the Pencil Makers Association . 
It 's a trade secret how many were plastic , and most writers still do n't know what they 're using . 
H.F. Ahmanson & Co. , the nation 's largest thrift holding company , posted a 12 % earnings decline for the third quarter while another large California savings and loan , Great Western Financial Corp. , reported a slight earnings gain . 
H.F. Ahmanson , parent of Home Savings of America , reported third-quarter net of $ 49.2 million , or 50 cents a share , down from $ 56.1 million , or 57 cents a share , in the year-earlier period . 
Most of the earnings decline reflected an increase in the company 's effective tax rate to 44 % from 37 % in the year-ago third quarter when nonrecurring tax credits were recorded , the company said . 
Pretax earnings declined 1.3 % . 
For the nine months , Los Angeles-based H.F. Ahmanson had profit of $ 128.1 million , or $ 1.29 a share , a 4.6 % decline from earnings of $ 134.2 million in the year-ago nine months . 
The company said the decline was attributable to a 79 % reduction in net gains on loan sales this year . 
Third-quarter spreads widened to the highest level in two years as loan portfolio yields rose and money costs declined , the company said . 
Great Western Financial said third-quarter profit rose slightly to $ 68.4 million , or 52 cents a share , from $ 67.9 million , or 53 cents a share , from a year ago . 
Great Western , based in Beverly Hills , Calif. , is a financial services firm and parent to Great Western Bank , an S&L . 
Great Western said it had a sharp increase in margins in the recent third quarter . 
Margins are the difference between the yield on the company 's earning assets and its own cost of funds . 
But a reduction in one-time gains on the sale of various assets and an increase in the company 's provision for loan losses held down the earnings gain , the company said . 
Great Western 's provision for loan losses was increased to $ 27.9 million for the recent quarter compared with $ 21.8 million a year ago primarily as a result of `` continued weakness in various commercial and multifamily real estate markets outside California . '' 
For the nine months Great Western posted net of $ 177.5 million , or $ 1.37 a share , a 5.9 % decline from $ 188.7 million , or $ 1.48 a share , in the year-ago period . 
Dun & Bradstreet Corp. posted a 15 % rise in third-quarter earnings . 
But revenue declined more than 2 % , reflecting in part a continuing drop in sales of credit services in the wake of controversy over the company 's sales practices . 
The information company also cited the stronger dollar , the sale last year of its former Official Airline Guides unit and other factors . 
Net income rose to a record $ 155.3 million , or 83 cents a share , from $ 134.8 million , or 72 cents a share . 
Revenue fell to $ 1.04 billion from $ 1.07 billion . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Dun & Bradstreet closed yesterday at $ 53.75 , down 25 cents a share . 
Analysts said the results were as expected , but several added that the earnings masked underlying weaknesses in several businesses . 
`` The quality of earnings was n't as high as I expected , '' said Eric Philo , an analyst for Goldman , Sachs & Co . 
For example , he noted , operating profit was weaker than he had anticipated , but nonoperating earnings of $ 14.6 million and a lower tax rate helped boost net income . 
Dun & Bradstreet said operating earnings rose 8 % , excluding the sale of Official Airline Guides . 
Third-quarter sales of U.S. credit services were `` disappointingly below sales '' of a year earlier , Dun & Bradstreet said . 
As previously reported , those sales have been declining this year in the wake of allegations that the company engaged in unfair sales practices that encouraged customers to overpurchase services . 
The company has denied the allegations but has negotiated a proposed $ 18 million settlement of related lawsuits . 
Analysts predict the sales impact will linger . 
`` There is n't much question there will continue to be a ripple effect , '' said John Reidy , an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc . 
Dun & Bradstreet noted that price competition in its Nielsen Marketing Research , Nielsen Clearing House and Donnelley Marketing businesses also restrained revenue growth . 
It cited cyclical conditions in its Moody 's Investors Service Inc. and D&B Plan Services units . 
For the nine months , net income rose 19 % to $ 449 million , or $ 2.40 a share , from $ 375.9 million , or $ 2.01 a share , a year earlier . 
Year-earlier earnings reflected costs of $ 14.3 million related to the acquisition of IMS International . 
Revenue rose slightly to $ 3.16 billion from $ 3.13 billion . 
Control Data Corp. said it licensed its airline yield-management software to the International Air Transport Association . 
Terms include a royalty arrangement , but details were n't disclosed . 
The computer equipment and financial services company said IATA , a trade group , will sell access to the package to its 180 airline members world-wide . 
Control Data will receive revenue linked to the number of passengers served by the software , IATA said . 
The package helps carriers solve pricing problems , such as how to react to discounts offered by competitors or what would be the optimum number of seats to offer at a given price . 
Wheeling-Pittsburgh Steel Corp. said it decided to proceed with installation of automatic gauge and shape controls at its 60-inch tandem cold rolling mill in Allenport , Pa . 
The new equipment , which will produce steel sheet with more uniform thickness and flatness , is likely to cost more than $ 20 million , the company said . 
When the company last considered adding the equipment two years ago , it estimated the cost at $ 21 million to $ 22 million , but a task force will have to prepare a detailed plan before the company can predict the current cost . 
The time schedule for installing the equipment also will be developed by the task force , the company said . 
Sir Richard Butler , 60-year-old chairman of Agricola ( U.K . ) Ltd. , was named chairman of County NatWest Investment Management Ltd. , the investment management subsidiary of County NatWest Ltd. , the investment banking arm of this British bank . 
Sir Richard succeeds John Plastow , who resigned in July . 
Sir Richard is also a non-executive director at National Westminister Bank and NatWest Investment Bank Ltd . 
In the long , frightening night after Tuesday 's devastating earthquake , Bay Area residents searched for comfort and solace wherever they could . 
Some found it on the screen of a personal computer . 
Hundreds of Californians made their way to their computers after the quake , and checked in with each other on electronic bulletin boards , which link computers CB-radio-style , via phone lines . 
Some of the most vivid bulletins came over The Well , a Sausalito , Calif. , board that is one of the liveliest outposts of the electronic underground . 
About two-thirds of the Well 's 3,000 subscribers live in the Bay Area . 
The quake knocked The Well out for six hours , but when it came back up , it teemed with emotional first-hand reports . 
Following are excerpts from the electronic traffic that night . 
The time is Pacific Daylight Time , and the initials or nicknames are those subscribers use to identify themselves . 
11:54 p.m . 
JCKC : 
Wow ! 
I was in the avenues , on the third floor of an old building , and except for my heart ( Beat , BEAT ! ) I 'm OK . 
Got back to Bolinas , and everything had fallen : broken poster frames with glass on the floor , file cabinets open or dumped onto the floor . 
11:59 p.m . 
JKD : 
I was in my favorite watering hole , waiting for the game to start . 
I felt the temblor begin and glanced at the table next to mine , smiled that guilty smile and we both mouthed the words , `` Earth-quake ! '' together . 
That 's usually how long it takes for the temblors to pass . 
This time , it just got stronger and then the building started shaking violently up and down as though it were a child 's toy block that was being tossed . 
12:06 a.m . 
HRH : 
I was in the Berkeley Main library when it hit . 
Endless seconds wondering if those huge windows would buckle and shower us with glass . 
Only a few books fell in the reading room . 
Then the auto paint shop fire sent an evil-looking cloud of black smoke into the air . 
12:07 a.m . 
ONEZIE : 
My younger daughter and I are fine . 
This building shook like hell and it kept getting stronger . 
Except for the gas tank at Hustead 's Towing Service exploding and burning in downtown Berkeley , things here are quite peaceful . 
A lot of car alarms went off . 
The cats are fine , although nervous . 
12:15 a.m . 
DHAWK : 
Huge fire from broken gas main in the Marina in SF . 
Areas that are made of ` fill ' liquefy . 
A woman in a three-story apartment was able to walk out the window of the third floor onto street level after the quake . 
The house just settled right down into the ground . 
12:38 a.m . 
DAYAC : 
I was driving my truck , stopped at a red light at the corner of Shattuck and Alcatraz at the Oakland-Berkeley border when it hit . 
Worst part was watching power lines waving above my head and no way to drive away . 
12:48 a.m . 
LMEYER : 
Was 300 ft. out on a pier in San Rafael . 
It flopped all around , real dramatic ! 
Many hairline cracks in the concrete slabs afterwards . 
Ruined the damn fishing ! 
1:00 a.m . 
HEYNOW : 
I rode it out on the second floor of Leo 's at 55th and Telegraph in Oakland . 
I heard parts of the building above my head cracking . 
I actually thought that I might die . 
I could n't decide if I should come home to Marin , because my house is on stilts . 
I decided to brave the storm . 
There was a horrible smell of gas as I passed the Chevron refinery before crossing the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge . 
I could also see the clouds across the bay from the horrible fire in the Marina District of San Francisco . 
I have felt many aftershocks . 
My back is still in knots and my hands are still shaking . 
I think a few of the aftershocks might just be my body shaking . 
1:11 a.m. 
GR8FLRED : 
I could see the flames from San Francisco from my house across the bay . 
It 's hard to believe this really is happening . 
1:11 a.m . 
RD : 
Building on the corner severely damaged , so an old lady and her very old mother are in the guest room . 
Books and software everywhere . 
This being typed in a standing position . 
1:20 a.m . 
DGAULT : 
Bolinas -- astride the San Andreas Fault . 
Did n't feel a thing , but noticed some strange bird behavior . 
Duck swarms . 
3:25 a.m . 
SAMURAI : 
I just felt another aftershock a few seconds ago . 
I 'm just numb . 
3:25 a.m . 
MACPOST : 
Downtown Bolinas seems to be the part of town that 's worst off . 
No power , minimal phones , and a mess of mayonnaise , wine , and everything else all over the floors of the big old general store and the People 's Co-op . 
The quivers move through my house every few minutes at unpredictable intervals , and the mouse that 's been living in my kitchen has taken refuge under my desk . 
It runs out frantically now and then , and is clearly pretty distressed . 
I was in Stinson Beach when the quake rolled through town . 
At first , we were unfazed . 
Then as things got rougher , we ran for the door and spent the next few minutes outside watching the brick sidewalk under our feet oozing up and down , and the flowers waving in an eerie rhythm . 
Amazing what it does to one 's heart rate and one 's short-term memory . 
Everyone looked calm , but there was this surreal low level of confusion as the aftershocks continued . 
4:02 a.m . 
SHIBUMI : 
Power is back on , and UCSF { medical center } seems to have quieted down for the night ( they were doing triage out in the parking lot from the sound and lights of it ) . 
A friend of mine was in an underground computer center in downtown SF when the quake hit . 
He said that one of the computers took a three-foot trip sliding across the floor . 
Today should be interesting as people realize how hard life is going to be here for a while . 
4:30 a.m . 
KIM : 
I got home , let the dogs into the house and noticed some sounds above my head , as if someone were walking on the roof , or upstairs . 
Then I noticed the car was bouncing up and down as if someone were jumping on it . 
I realized what was happening and screamed into the house for the dogs . 
Cupboard doors were flying , the trash can in the kitchen walked a few feet , the dogs came running , and I scooted them into the dog run and stood in the doorway myself , watching the outside trash cans dance across the concrete . 
When I realized it was over , I went and stood out in front of the house , waiting and praying for Merrill to come home , shivering as if it were 20 below zero until he got there . 
Never in my life have I been so frightened . 
When I saw the pictures of 880 and the Bay Bridge , I began to cry . 
5:09 a.m . 
JROE : 
The Sunset { District } was more or less like a pajama party all evening , lots of people & dogs walking around , drinking beer . 
6:50 a.m . 
CAROLG : 
I was just sitting down to meet with some new therapy clients , a couple , and the building started shaking like crazy . 
It 's a flimsy structure , built up on supports , and it was really rocking around . 
The three of us stopped breathing for a moment , and then when it kept on coming we lunged for the doorway . 
Needless to say , it was an interesting first session ! 
7:13 a.m . 
CALLIOPE : 
Albany escaped embarrassingly unscathed . 
Biggest trouble was scared family who could n't get a phone line through , and spent a really horrible hour not knowing . 
8:01 a.m . 
HLR : 
Judy and I were in our back yard when the lawn started rolling like ocean waves . 
We ran into the house to get Mame , but the next tremor threw me in the air and bounced me as I tried to get to my feet . 
We are all fine here , although Mame was extremely freaked . 
Kitchen full of broken crystal . 
Books and tapes all over my room . 
Not one thing in the house is where it is supposed to be , but the structure is fine . 
While I was standing on the lawn with Mame , waiting for another tremor , I noticed that all the earthworms were emerging from the ground and slithering across the lawn ! 
9:31 a.m. 
GR8FLRED : 
It 's amazing how one second can so completely change your life . 
9:38 a.m . 
FIG : 
I guess we 're all living very tentatively here , waiting for the expected but dreaded aftershock . 
It 's hard to accept that it 's over and only took 15 seconds . 
I wonder when we 'll be able to relax . 
9:53 a.m . 
PANDA : 
Flesh goes to total alert for flight or fight . 
Nausea seems a commonplace symptom . 
Berkeley very quiet right now . 
I walked along Shattuck between Delaware and Cedar at a few minutes before eight this morning . 
Next to Chez Panisse a homeless couple , bundled into a blue sleeping bag , sat up , said , `` Good morning '' and then the woman smiled , said , `` Is n't it great just to be alive ? '' 
I agreed . 
It is . 
Great . 
Georgia-Pacific Corp. , exceeding some analysts ' expectations , said third-quarter earnings rose 56 % to $ 178 million , or $ 2.03 a share , from $ 114 million , or $ 1.19 a share , in the year-earlier period . 
Sales increased 10 % to $ 2.65 billion from $ 2.41 billion . 
Per-share earnings were enhanced by the company 's share buy-back program , which reduced the average shares outstanding to 87.5 million in the quarter from 95.8 million in the same quarter of 1988 . 
With strong prices in the company 's two major areas -- building products as well as pulp and paper -- analysts had expected a roaring quarter . 
But the performance exceeded some estimates of around $ 1.90 a share . 
Fueling the growth , among other things , were higher-than-expected prices for certain building products . 
One reason : efforts to protect the spotted owl led to restrictions on logging in the Pacific Northwest , constricting supply and forcing prices up . 
Another reason : strikes , both at Georgia-Pacific and other lumber companies also cut supplies and raised prices , analysts said . 
For the nine months , Georgia-Pacific 's earnings increased 49 % to $ 504 million , or $ 5.58 a share , from $ 338 million , or $ 3.41 a share . 
Sales rose 11 % to $ 7.73 billion from $ 6.94 billion . 
In composite New York Stock Exchange Trading , Georgia-Pacific stock rose $ 1.25 a share yesterday to close at $ 58 . 
The House Public Works and Transportation Committee approved a bill that would give the Transportation Department power to block airline leveraged buy-outs , despite a clear veto threat from the Bush administration . 
The 23-5 vote clears the way for consideration on the House floor next week or the week after . 
Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner , in a letter to the committee , warned that he would urge President Bush to veto the legislation if it passed Congress . 
The Senate Commerce Committee already has approved similar legislation . 
On Monday , a letter from Mr. Skinner 's deputy , Elaine Chao , said the administration opposed the legislation `` in its present form . '' 
Some of the bill 's supporters had taken heart from the fact that the letter was n't signed by Mr. Skinner and that it did n't contain a veto threat . 
The stepped-up administration warnings annoyed some lawmakers , especially senior Republicans who supported the bill because they thought the Transportation Department favored it . 
`` We backed this bill because we thought it would help Skinner , '' one Republican said , `` and now we 're out there dangling in the wind . '' 
A few weeks ago , Mr. Skinner testified before Congress that it would be `` cleaner , more efficient '' if he had authority to block buy-outs in advance . 
But he never took an official position on the bill and has steadfastly maintained that he already has enough authority to deal with buy-outs . 
Under the committee bill , the Transportation secretary would have 30 days , and an additional 20 days if needed , to review any proposed purchase of 15 % or more of a major U.S. airline 's voting stock . 
The secretary would be required to block an acquisition if he concluded that it would so weaken an airline financially that it would hurt safety or reduce the carrier 's ability to compete , or if it gave control to a foreign interest . 
Although the legislation would apply to any acquisition of a major airline , it is aimed at transactions financed by large amounts of debt . 
Supporters of the bill are concerned an airline might sacrifice costly safety measures in order to repay debt . 
The panel 's action occurs in a politically charged atmosphere surrounding recent buy-out proposals , their apparent collapse and the volatile conditions in the stock market . 
`` It became apparent in hearings that there ought to be regulation of leveraged buy-outs of some sort , '' Rep. James Oberstar ( D. , Minn. ) , chairman of the House Aviation Subcommittee , said during the panel 's deliberations . 
`` I do n't believe in the airline business you can be totally laissez-faire because of the high degree of public interest '' at stake . 
But Mr. Skinner disagreed , calling the legislation `` a retreat from the policy of deregulaton of the airline industry . '' 
In his letter to Committee Chairman Glenn Anderson ( D. , Calif. ) , the secretary also said the bill `` would be at odds with the administration 's policies welcoming open foreign investment and market allocation of resources . '' 
Currently , the Transportation Department does n't have the authority to block a takeover in advance . 
However , if the secretary concludes that a transaction has made a carrier unfit to operate , the department may revoke its certificate , grounding the airline . 
Such authority is more than adequate , say opponents of the legislation . 
But supporters argue that grounding an airline is so drastic that the department would hesitate doing it . 
The panel rejected a proposal pushed by AMR Corp. , the parent of American Airlines , to allow the Transportation secretary to block corporate raiders from waging proxy fights to oust boards that oppose a leveraged buy-out . 
It also voted down proposals to give the secretary much more discretion on whether to block a buy-out and to require the department to consider the impact of a buy-out on workers . 
London shares rallied to post strong gains after initial fears evaporated that the California earthquake would depress Wall Street prices . 
Tokyo stocks , which rebounded strongly Tuesday , extended their gains yesterday , but most other Asian and Pacific markets closed sharply lower . 
In London , the Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index jumped 34.6 points to close at its intraday high of 2170.1 . 
The index was under pressure for most of the morning over concerns that the effects of Tuesday night 's major earthquake in the San Francisco area would undermine the U.S. market . 
The mood changed after dealers reappraised the direct impact of the disaster on shares and Wall Street rebounded from early losses . 
The Financial Times 30-share index settled 27.8 points higher at 1758.5 . 
Volume was 449.3 million shares , the slowest of a hectic week , compared with 643.4 million Tuesday . 
U.K. composite , or non-life , insurers , which some equity analysts said might be heavily hit by the earthquake disaster , helped support the London market by showing only narrow losses in early trading . 
The insurers ' relative resilience gave the market time to reappraise the impact of the California disaster on U.K. equities , dealers said . 
Dealers said the market still has n't shaken off its nervousness after its bumpy ride of the past several sessions , caused by interest-rate increases last week and Wall Street 's 6.9 % plunge Friday . 
But technical factors , including modest gains in the value of the pound , helped draw buying back into the market and reverse losses posted a day earlier . 
Among composite insurers , General Accident rose 10 pence to # 10.03 ( $ 15.80 ) a share , Guardian Royal climbed 5 to 217 pence , Sun Alliance rose 3 to 290 , and Royal Insurance jumped 12 to 450 . 
Life insurers fared similarly , with Legal & General advancing 3 to 344 , although Prudential fell 2 to 184 1\/2 . 
Pearl Group rose 5 to 628 , and Sun Life finished unchanged at # 10.98 . 
Most banking issues retreated after a sector downgrade by Warburg Securities , although National Westminister showed strength on positive comments from brokerage firms about its long-term prospects . 
NatWest , the most actively traded of the banks , finished at 300 , up 1 . 
B.A.T Industries fell in early dealings but recovered to finish at 754 , up 5 . 
Dealers said the market was nervous ahead of a special B.A.T holders ' meeting today . 
The session is to consider a defensive plan to spin off assets to fend off Sir James Goldsmith 's # 13.4 billion bid for B.A.T . 
The recent stock market drop has shaken confidence in the plan , but dealers said the shares fell initially on questions about whether Mr. Goldsmith 's highly leveraged bid will come to fruition . 
Trading was suspended in WCRS Group , a U.K. advertising concern , pending an announcement that it is buying the remaining 50 % of France 's Carat Holding for 2.02 billion French francs ( $ 318.7 million ) and expanding commercial and equity ties with advertising group Eurocom . 
Merchant banker Morgan Grenfell climbed 14 to 406 on renewed takeover speculation . 
S.G. Warburg , also mentioned in the rumor mill , jumped 14 at to 414 . 
Jaguar advanced 19 to 673 as traders contemplated a potential battle between General Motors and Ford Motor for control of the U.K. luxury auto maker . 
Tokyo 's Nikkei index of 225 issues rose 111.48 points , or 0.32 % , to 35107.56 . 
The index gained 527.39 Tuesday . 
Volume was estimated at 800 million shares , compared with 678 million Tuesday . 
Declining issues outnumbered advancers 505-455 , with 172 unchanged . 
The Tokyo Stock Price Index of all issues listed in the first section , which gained 41.76 Tuesday , was up 0.24 points , or 0.01 % , at 2642.88 . 
In early trading in Tokyo Thursday , the Nikkei index rose 135.09 points to 35242.65 . 
On Wednesday , shares were pushed up by index-related buying on the part of investment trusts as well as small orders from individuals and corporations , traders said . 
Institutions , meanwhile , stepped back to the sidelines as the direction of U.S. interest rates remained unclear . 
The uncertainty was multiplied by the persistent strength of the dollar , traders said , and by the U.S. trade deficit , which widened by 31 % in August from the previous month . 
Traders and analysts said they did n't see any effect on Tokyo stocks from the California earthquake . 
The impact on Japanese insurers and property owners with interests in the San Francisco area is still being assessed , they said . 
Buying was scattered across a wide range of issues , making the session fairly characterless , traders said . 
With uncertainty still hanging over interest rates and the dollar , the market failed to find a focus that might lead to further investor commitments , they said . 
Some traders said the popularity of issues that gained yesterday wo n't last long , as investors will rotate their buying choices over the short term . 
Interest rate-sensitive shares such as steel , construction and electric utility companies , which rose early in the week , saw their advance weaken yesterday . 
Traders said these issues need large-volume buying to push up their prices , so substantial gains are n't likely unless institutional investors participate . 
An outstanding issue in yesterday 's session was Mitsubishi Rayon , which surged 95 to 905 yen ( $ 6.34 ) a share . 
Its popularity was due to speculation about the strong earnings potential of a new type of plastic wrap for household use , a trader at County Natwest Securities Japan said . 
Some laggard food issues attracted bargain-hunters , traders said . 
Kirin Brewery was up 100 at 2,000 , and Ajinomoto gained 70 to 2,840 . 
Pharmaceuticals were mostly higher , with SS Pharmaceutical gaining 140 to 1,980 . 
Shares closed lower in other major Asian and Pacific markets , including Sydney , Hong Kong , Singapore , Taipei , Wellington , Seoul and Manila . 
Most of those markets had rebounded the day before from Monday 's slide . 
But unlike the Tokyo exchange , they failed to extend the rise to a second session . 
Elsewhere , prices surged for a second day in Frankfurt , closed higher in Zurich , Stockholm and Amsterdam and were broadly lower in Milan , Paris and Brussels . 
South African gold stocks ended marginally firmer . 
In Brussels , it was the first trading day for most major shares since stocks tumbled on Wall Street Friday . 
Trading had been impeded by a major computer failure that took place before the start of Monday 's session . 
Here are price trends on the world 's major stock markets , as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective , Geneva . 
To make them directly comparable , each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100 . 
The percentage change is since year-end . 
Housing construction sank in September to its lowest level since the last recession , the Commerce Department reported . 
Work began on homes and apartments at an annual rate of 1,263,000 units last month , down 5.2 % from August , the department said . 
The September decline followed an even steeper drop of 6.2 % in August and left housing starts at their weakest since October 1982 , when the country was nearing the end of a recession . 
Originally the department had reported the August decline as 5 % . 
The numbers suggest that the housing industry is still suffering the effects of the Federal Reserve 's battle against inflation . 
The industry had shown signs of recovery this summer , after the central bank began to relax its clamp on credit , allowing interest rates to drop a bit after pushing them up for a year . 
Sales of new homes rose and inventories of houses , which had been climbing , dropped . 
But last month new construction in all types of homes waned , from single-family houses to large apartment complexes . 
`` It 's pretty much weak across the board , '' said Martin Regalia , chief economist of the National Council of Savings Institutions . 
Mr. Regalia said the industry may be reluctant to step up building at the moment for fear the inventories of unsold homes will increase again . 
Another reason for the weakness , he said , may be that mortgage rates have hit a plateau since they began edging down after a peak in March . 
In August , rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages started creeping up a bit , but they inched down again through September . 
`` Rates have n't really peeled off that much , '' Mr. Regalia said . 
`` We 've kind of settled now into an interest-rate environment that 's fairly high . '' 
Work was begun on single family homes -- the core of the housing market -- at an annual rate of 971,000 in September , a drop of 2.1 % from the previous month . 
That followed a 3.3 % decline in August . 
Construction of apartments and other multi-family dwellings slipped 2.2 % to an annual rate of 1,022,000 following a 3.5 % decline in August . 
The number of building permits issued for future construction dropped 2.4 % to a 1,296,000 annual rate after rising 3.7 % in August . 
All the numbers were adjusted for normal seasonal variations in building activity . 
The housing starts numbers , however , are one of the least precise of the government 's economic indicators and are often revised significantly as more information is collected . 
Shearson Lehman Hutton Holdings Inc. posted a sharp third-quarter turnaround from a year earlier , but net income would have dropped from the second quarter without a $ 37 million after-tax gain . 
The securities firm posted third-quarter net of $ 66 million , or 64 cents a share , compared with a restated year-earlier loss of $ 3 million , or 11 cents a share . 
Revenue climbed 25 % to $ 3.3 billion from $ 2.6 billion . 
The latest period included the gain , which was $ 77 million before tax , from the previously announced sale of the institutional money management business of Lehman Management Co . 
The 1988 period was restated from net income of $ 8 million to correct an overstatement in the company 's Boston Co. subsidiary . 
In the 1989 second quarter , Shearson had net income of $ 55 million , or 54 cents a share . 
An average 102.5 million common shares were outstanding in the latest quarter , up from 87.1 million . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Shearson shares lost 37.5 cents to $ 18.125 . 
The company said the improved performance from a year ago reflects higher commissions and revenue from marketmaking and trading for its own account . 
Commission revenue was $ 522 million , up 49 % . 
But industrywide trading activity slowed in September as institutional investors turned cautious and individuals continued to shy away from the market . 
Investment banking revenue fell 32 % to $ 205 million , in part reflecting the continued slowdown of the underwriting business . 
In the nine months , net fell 3 % to $ 106 million , or 98 cents a share , from $ 110 million , or $ 1.05 a share . 
Revenue advanced 26 % to $ 9.6 billion from $ 7.6 billion . 
Two major drug companies posted strong third-quarter earnings , in line with profits already reported by industry leaders and analysts ' expectations . 
But Pfizer Inc. , based in New York , reported flat earnings . 
Schering-Plough Corp. , based in Madison , N.J. , reported a 21 % rise in earnings as American Home Products Corp. of New York posted an 11 % increase in net . 
American Home Products 
American Home Products said sales and earnings for the third quarter and nine months were at record levels . 
Sales for the third quarter increased 6.5 % to $ 1.51 billion from $ 1.42 billion . 
Sales of health-care products increased 6 % in the third quarter , based in part on strong sales of prescription drugs such as Premarin , an estrogen-replacement drug , and sales of the company 's infant formula . 
American Home Products said net income benefited from a `` lower effective tax rate , '' reflecting a reduction of foreign tax rates , and additional operations in Puerto Rico . 
Net also was aided by a gain on the sale of the company 's equity interests in South Africa effective Sept. 1 . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , American Home Products closed at $ 102.25 a share , down 75 cents . 
Pfizer 
Pfizer said third-quarter sales increased 4 % to $ 1.44 billion from $ 1.38 billion . 
The company said net income was flat because of investment in research and development and costs related to launches of several products . 
The company said the dollar 's continued strengthening reduced world-wide sales growth by three percentage points . 
Pfizer posted its largest gains in healthcare sales , up 3 % , and consumer products , up 23 % . 
Sales by the specialty chemicals and materials science segments were flat , and sales by the agriculture segment declined 5 % . 
In the health-care segment , pharmaceutical sales increased 4 % and sales of hospital products increased 1 % . 
During the quarter , Pfizer received federal approval of Procardia XL , a calcium channel blocker approved for both angina and hypertension , and Monorail Piccolino , used to open obstructed coronary arteries . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday , Pfizer closed at $ 67.75 a share , up 75 cents . 
Schering-Plough 
Schering-Plough said sales gained 2.7 % to $ 743.7 million from $ 724.4 million . 
In the period , the company completed the sale of its European cosmetics businesses , sold a majority interest in its Brazilian affiliate , and announced the reorganization of its over-the-counter drug businesses into a new unit , Schering-Plough Health Care Products . 
These actions did n't affect results because the gain on the sale of the European cosmetics businesses was offset by provisions relating to the Brazil divestiture and drug restructuring . 
U.S. pharmaceutical sales rose 15 % , led by allergy , asthma and cold products ; dermatological products ; anti-infectives and anti-cancer products ; and cardiovascular products . 
World-wide consumer product sales declined 12 % , primarily because of the European cosmetics sale . 
Significantly lower sales of ` Stay Trim ' diet aids also were a factor in the drop . 
The Maybelline beauty product line had higher sales following a sluggish first half . 
In Big Board composite trading , Schering-Plough shares fell 75 cents to close at $ 74.125 . 
Swedish auto and aerospace concern Saab-Scania AB said it received a 250 million krona ( $ 39 million ) order from Swiss Crossair , one of Europe 's leading regional air companies , for five Saab 340B turboprop commuter aircraft . 
It is quite unfortunate that you failed so miserably in reporting the Hurricane Hugo disaster . 
Your Sept. 27 page-one article `` Charleston Lost Quite a Lot to Hugo , Especially Gentility '' leaves the impression that the storm was little more than an inconvenience . 
The damage reported focused on a select few who owned irreplaceable historic homes on the Battery . 
Not mentioned were the 50,000 people rendered homeless , and the more than 200,000 out of work for an indeterminable period ; the $ 1 billion-plus in losses to homes and personal property on the barrier islands ; the near - and long-term impact on the state 's largest industry , tourism , not to mention the human suffering . 
In centering on the disruption of a few proud local customs such as the historic homes tour and the damage to the antiquities , your reporter served to only perpetuate an outdated and stereotypically provincial view of this otherwise thriving port city . 
The damage will undoubtedly prove to be one of the epic human and economic disasters of the decade in this country . 
David M. Carroll 
Columbia , S.C . 
Your story was tasteless and insensitive . 
Depicting the people of a traumatized city reeling from a disaster of unprecedented proportions was at the very best ludicrous under the circumstances . 
Your narrow focus appears to be a contrived attempt to show the people of that historic city to be doddering fools . 
You had to have been blind not to see the scenario there for what it was and is and will continue to be for months and even years -- a part of South Carolina that has sustained a blow that the Red Cross expects will cost that organization alone some $ 38 million . 
William C. Barksdale Jr . 
Columbia , S.C . 
Charleston is historic and aristocratic , as your reporter said , but not haughty , as he suggested . 
Charlestonians are instead indomitable and have contributed mightily to the culture and history of our country for more than 300 years . 
I suggest your reporter see Charleston next spring in its full glory . 
William C. Stuart III 
Silver Spring , Md . 
Affiliated Bankshares of Colorado Inc. said it agreed to sell its 10 % interest in Rocky Mountain Bankcard Systems for $ 18.5 million to Colorado National Bank of Denver and Central Bank of Denver . 
Colorado National is a unit of Colorado National Bankshares Inc. and Central is a unit of First Bank System of Minneapolis . 
Affiliated said it expects to record a pretax gain of about $ 18.5 million from the sale of the credit-card business , which should more than offset any reduction in the carrying value of real estate and real-estate loans on its books . 
The U.S. Export-Import Bank tentatively decided to guarantee commercial bank financing for the purchase of two Boeing Co. 767 airliners by Avianca , Colombia 's international airline , at a cost of about $ 150 million . 
The loan guarantee would amount to about $ 127.5 million , or 85 % of the cost of the aircraft . 
Because of the size of the proposed loan guarantee , the Ex-Im Bank 's preliminary commitment is subject to review by the House and Senate Banking committees . 
Ex-Im Bank officials said this review process currently is under way . 
Sebastian Guzman Cabrera took over the oil workers union , Mexico 's most powerful labor organization , only last January . 
But even in that short time Mr. Guzman Cabrera has become as controversial in his own way as his deposed predecessor , Joaquin Hernandez Galicia , known as La Quina . 
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari used the army to oust La Quina , who reigned for 28 years over a graft-riddled empire that made state-run Petroleos Mexicanos , or Pemex , one of the world 's most inefficient oil companies . 
Now , Mr. Guzman Cabrera is facing accusations that he 's as much a company man as La Quina was a crook . 
In recent contract negotiations with Pemex management , Mr. Guzman Cabrera accepted major concessions that greatly curtail the union 's role in subcontracting , long a source of millions of dollars in illicit earnings . 
And with the quiet pragmatism of Mr. Guzman Cabrera replacing the prickly populism of La Quina , government technocrats have been given a free hand to open the petrochemical sector to wider private and foreign investment . 
Mr. Guzman Cabrera 's new order has n't arrived without resistance . 
Brawls between union factions still erupt at Pemex installations . 
Leftist leader Cuauhtemoc Cardenas publicly questioned Mr. Guzman Cabrera 's `` moral quality , '' suggesting he is part of a conspiracy to turn over the country 's oil , a symbol of Mexican nationalism , to foreigners . 
The 61-year-old Mr. Guzman Cabrera takes such criticisms in stride . 
`` This is n't a new kind of union leadership , it 's a new Mexico . 
We 're no longer afraid of associating with private or foreign capital , '' he says . 
Pemex , which produces 40 % of government revenue , desperately needs new investment . 
Since world oil prices collapsed in 1982 , the government has siphoned Pemex 's coffers to make payments on Mexico 's $ 97 billion foreign debt . 
Little money has been returned to upgrade Pemex 's aging facilities . 
While the government drains Pemex from above , the union has drained it from below . 
A bloated payroll and pervasive graft caused Pemex 's operating costs to balloon to 95 cents of each $ 1 in sales , far above the industry norm . 
The declines in investment and efficiency explain in part why Mexico has been importing gasoline this year . 
Some projections show Mexico importing crude by the end of the century , barring an overhaul of operations . 
`` Whatever you tried to change , whether it was cutting costs or attracting new partners , the big obstacle was the old union leadership , '' says oil consultant George Baker . 
Enter Mr. Guzman Cabrera , who has a clear understanding of where union leaders fit in the pro-enterprise regime of President Salinas . 
`` I 'm the secretary-general , if there is one , '' he says , greeting a visitor to his office . 
Beginning as a laborer in a refinery , Mr. Guzman Cabrera put in more than 40 years at Pemex before being pushed into retirement by La Quina after a dispute two years ago . 
Though he also long benefited from the system built by La Quina , Mr. Guzman Cabrera says union perks had simply gotten out of hand . 
They are `` at the base of all of the problems of corruption , '' he says . 
Thus , in recent contract negotiations , Mr. Guzman Cabrera gave up the union 's right to assign 40 % of all of Pemex 's outside contracts -- an enormous source of kickbacks . 
The union also ceded the 2 % commission it had received on all Pemex maintenance contracts . 
( The union will keep a 2 % commission on construction projects . ) 
The new contract also eliminates the $ 15 monthly coupon , good only at union-owned grocery stores , that was part of the salary of every worker , from roughneck to chief executive . 
About 9,800 technical workers , notably chemists and lawyers , were switched to non-union status . 
Also , because of its reduced capital budget , Pemex has phased out about 50,000 transitory construction workers , reducing the work force to about 140,000 , the union leader says . 
Mr. Guzman Cabrera says the union 's sacrifices will be offset by a wage and benefit package that amounts to a 22 % increase in compensation . 
But Pemex managers are the ones most thrilled by the contract . 
`` We are retaking the instruments of administration , '' says Raul Robles , a Pemex subdirector . 
Pemex officials would n't say how much money the new contract would save the company , but one previous government estimate pegged savings at around $ 500 million a year . 
Pemex 's customers also are pleased with the company 's new spirit . 
Grupo Desc , a big conglomerate , has long depended on Pemex petrochemicals to produce plastic packing material . 
But when the Pemex plant shut down for an annual overhaul , it would never give notice to its customers . 
`` The capriciousness would completely disrupt our operations , '' says Ernesto Vega Velasco , Desc 's finance director . 
This year , for the first time , Desc and other customers were consulted well in advance of the Pemex plant 's shutdown to ensure minimal inconvenience . 
Taming the union complements previous moves by the government to attract private investment in petrochemicals , which Mexico has been forced to import in large quantities in recent years . 
In May , the government unveiled new foreign investment regulations that create special trusts allowing foreigners , long limited to a 40 % stake in secondary petrochemical companies , to own up to 100 % . 
Later , the government reclassified several basic petrochemicals as secondary products . 
But Pemex 's courtship with private companies , and especially foreign ones , is controversial in a country where oil has been a symbol of national sovereignty since foreign oil holdings were nationalized in 1938 . 
`` They are preparing the workers for what 's coming : foreign control , '' wrote Heberto Castillo , a leftist leader . 
Mr. Guzman Cabrera and government officials insist that foreigners will be limited to investing in secondary petroleum products . 
But the new union leader makes no apologies for Pemex 's more outward-looking attitude . 
`` If we do not integrate into this new world of interdependence , sooner or later we 're going to become victims of our own isolation , '' he says . 
Couple Counseling Grows to Defuse Stress 
MORE EXECUTIVES and their spouses are seeking counseling as work and family pressures mount . 
Some employers initiate referrals , especially if work problems threaten a top manager 's job . 
Many couples `` are like ships passing in the night , '' a communications gulf that sparks problems on the job and at home , says psychologist Harry Levinson . 
His Levinson Institute in Belmont , Mass. , has seen in recent years a doubling in the number of executives and spouses at its weeklong counseling program . 
Employers foot the bill , he says , figuring what 's good for the couple is good for the company . 
One East Coast manufacturing executive , faced with a job transfer his wife resented , found that counseling helped them both come to grips with the move . 
And the vice president of a large Midwestern company realized that an abrasive temperament threatened his career when his wife confided that similar behavior at home harmed their marriage . 
More dual-career couples also are getting help , with men increasingly bringing their working wives for joint counseling . 
`` The level of stress for a woman is often so high , it 's the husband who says , ` I 'm worried about her , ' '' says psychologist Marjorie Hansen Shaevitz . 
Her Institute for Family and Work Relationships in La Jolla , Calif. , has noted a doubling in the number of couples seeking help the past two years . 
`` No matter how competent and smart you both are , the relationship almost certainly will erode if you do n't have time to talk , to have fun and to be sexual , '' says Ms. Shaevitz . 
She urges client couples to begin a `` detoxification '' period , purging social and other nonproductive activities and setting time apart for themselves . 
`` Putting those times on the calendar , '' she says , `` is as important as remembering business appointments . '' 
Power of Suggestion Stronger in Japan 
HERE 'S ONE more explanation for why Japan is a tough industrial competitor : Two of three Japanese employees submit suggestions to save money , increase efficiency and boost morale , while only 8 % of American workers do . 
And the Japanese make far more suggestions -- 2,472 per 100 eligible employees vs. only 13 per 100 employees in the 
Data for 1987 from the National Association of Suggestion Systems and the Japan Human Relations Association also indicate that Japanese employers adopt four of five suggestions , while their U.S. counterparts accept just one in four . 
In Japan , small suggestions are encouraged . 
Each new employee is expected to submit four daily in the first few months on the job . 
U.S. companies tend to favor suggestions `` that go for the home runs , '' says Gary Floss , vice president of corporate quality at Control Data Corp . 
That helps explain why American employers grant an average award of $ 604.72 per suggestion , while Japan 's payment is $ 3.23 . 
Still , suggestions ' net savings per 100 employees is $ 274,475 in Japan vs. $ 24,891 in the U.S. . 
U.S. companies developing management teams are wrestling with how to handle individual suggestion systems . 
Control Data , for one , plays down its employee suggestion program because it favors the team-management focus . 
Merger Fallout : Beware Employee Dishonesty 
CORPORATE security directors increasingly worry that merger mania spawns a rise in employee dishonesty . 
A Security magazine survey places the effect of takeovers and buy-outs among the industry 's 10 biggest challenges . 
`` If it causes management to take their eye off the ball , inventory shrinkage is going to be affected , '' says Lewis Shealy , vice president for loss prevention at Marshall Field 's , the department store chain . 
A separate study of the extent of employee misconduct linked general job satisfaction to property loss . 
Co-author Richard Hollinger cites what happened at one family-owned company absorbed by a foreign giant . 
Pilferage climbed dramatically as many angry employees `` felt abandoned by the former owners , '' says the University of Florida sociologist . 
But top management should watch for other tell-tale signs of employee misdeeds , like expense-account fudging and phone misuse . 
Security consultant Dennis Dalton of Ventura , Calif. , thinks mergers often trigger longer lunch hours and increased absenteeism , conduct which can sap the bottom line more than thefts . 
New management can take several steps to reduce dishonesty . 
Most important , experts say , is to show that a company 's ethical tone is set at the top . 
Mr. Dalton also recommends that the chief executive establish a rumor control center and move swiftly to bolster morale . 
Consultant John Keller of Southlake , Texas , urges that top management adopt a `` tough hands-on approach '' with very tight controls and monitoring . 
And security authority Robert L. Duston favors disciplining all employees who cheat . 
Firms Walk Fine Line In Distributing Profits 
ARE CORPORATE profits distributed fairly ? 
A survey by Sirota , Alper & Pfau , a New York consulting firm , underscores the difficulty for top management in satisfying employees and investors on that score . 
Nearly seven of 10 investors think companies reinvest `` too little '' of their profits in the business . 
And half the employees surveyed think companies dole out too little to them . 
But both see a common enemy : About 66 % of employees and 73 % of investors think senior managers get too big a slice of the profit pie . 
Bank of New York Co. said it agreed in principle to acquire the credit-card business of Houston-based First City Bancorp. of Texas for between $ 130 million and $ 134 million . 
The move , subject to a definitive agreement , is part of a trend by big-city banks that have been buying up credit-card portfolios to expand their business . 
Just last month , a Bank of New York subsidiary agreed to buy the credit-card operation of Dreyfus Corp. 's Dreyfus Consumer Bank for $ 168 million , a transaction that is expected to be completed by the end of the year . 
First City 's portfolio includes approximately 640,000 accounts with about $ 550 million in loans outstanding . 
First City , which issues both MasterCard and Visa cards , has agreed to act as an agent bank . 
At the end of the third quarter , Bank of New York 's credit-card business consisted of 2.4 million accounts with $ 3.6 billion in loans outstanding . 
Bank of New York is currently the seventh-largest issuer of credit cards in the 
First City said that because of increased competition in the credit-card business , it had decided it either had to expand its own holdings substantially or sell them . 
`` We think there 's a good prospect that competition is going to get pretty fierce in this market , '' said James E. Day , a First City vice president . 
`` We see it becoming a bargain-basement kind of business . '' 
The company estimated that the transaction would enhance its book value , which stood at $ 28.55 a share on Sept. 30 , by more than $ 100 million , or about $ 4 a share . 
The company also said the transaction would bolster after-tax earnings by $ 3.25 a share when completed and boost its primary capital ratio to 7 % from 6.63 % . 
First City , which recently purchased three small Texas banking concerns , said it would use the proceeds to pursue additional expansion opportunities in the Southwest and elsewhere . 
With that possibility in mind , analysts said the transaction was a positive move for First City . 
`` I think they 'll be able to move faster to make acquisitions in Texas , '' said Brent Erensel , an analyst with Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette . 
`` That 's something they can do very well . 
British Airways PLC said it is seeking improved terms and a sharply lower price in any revised bid for United Airlines parent UAL Corp. following the collapse of a $ 6.79 billion , $ 300-a-share buy-out bid . 
Derek Stevens , British Air 's chief financial officer , told Dow Jones Professional Investor Report a price of $ 230 a share is `` certainly not too low , '' and indicated his company would like to reduce the size of its $ 750 million cash investment . 
He added the airline is n't committed to going forward with any new bid , and has n't participated in bankers ' efforts to revive the transaction that collapsed . 
`` We 're in no way committed to a deal going through at all . 
We 're not rushing into anything . 
We do n't want to be party to a second rejection , '' he said , adding that coming up with a revised offer could easily take several weeks . 
Mr. Stevens 's remarks , confirming a report in The Wall Street Journal that British Air wants to start from scratch in any new bid for the nation 's second-largest airline , helped push UAL stock lower for the fourth straight day . 
UAL fell $ 6.25 a share to $ 191.75 on volume of 2.3 million shares in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange as concern deepened among takeover stock traders about the length of time it will take to revive the purchase . 
Under the original buy-out approved by the UAL board Sept. 14 , UAL 's pilots planned to put up $ 200 million in cash and make $ 200 million in annual cost concessions for a 75 % stake . 
UAL management was to pay $ 15 million for 10 % , and British Air was to receive a 15 % stake . 
The buy-out fell through when Citicorp and Chase Manhattan Corp. unexpectedly failed to obtain bank financing . 
Since then , UAL stock has fallen 33 % in what may rank as the largest collapse of a takeover stock ever . 
The tenor of Mr. Stevens 's remarks seemed to indicate that British Air will take a more active , high-profile role in pursuing any new bid . 
He said he believes UAL management was badly advised on the funding of its original transaction . 
Mr. Stevens said British Air has n't received any new buy-out proposals from the labor-management group , led by UAL Chairman Stephen Wolf , and has n't received any indication of when one might be forthcoming . 
`` As far as we 're concerned , we 're waiting for the dust to settle , '' he said . 
Although British Air is waiting to see what the buy-out group comes up with , Mr. Stevens said a revised transaction with less debt leverage is likely to be more attractive to banks . 
He said the original proposal is dead , and all aspects of a revised version are up for change , in light of the changes in UAL 's market price , the amount of debt banks are willing to fund , and the price British Air would be willing to pay . 
Mr. Stevens said he expects the new price will be considerably lower , but declined to specify a figure . 
Asked whether a $ 230-a-share figure circulating in the market yesterday is too low , he said , `` It 's certainly not too low . '' 
He added the original offer was `` a pretty full price , '' and that British Air 's contribution `` was quite a large chunk for us . '' 
British Air was originally attracted to the chance of obtaining a 15 % stake in the company , but was n't particularly happy with paying $ 750 million . 
`` If the { new } deal had us putting up less money but still having 15 % , that would be a point in our favor , '' he said . 
In any new proposal , British Air would expect a greater rate of return than the 20%-plus in the original proposal . 
In the event that the buy-out group stalls in reviving its bid , the UAL board could remain under some pressure to seek another transaction , even without any legal obligation to do so . 
Roughly one-third of its stock is believed held by takeover stock traders , who could vote to oust the board if they become impatient . 
Meanwhile , the buy-out group 's task of holding its fragile coalition together , in the face of the bid 's collapse and internal opposition from two other employee groups , has been further complicated by an apparent rift in the ranks of the pilot union itself . 
A pilot representing a group of 220 pilots hired during United 's 1985 strike filed suit Friday in Chicago federal court to block the takeover . 
The dissident pilots oppose the plan because it would cause them to lose their seniority . 
UAL 's management agreed to reduce the seniority of those pilots in exchange for the support of the United pilot union for the buy-out proposal . 
The 220 pilots involved in the suit are n't members of the union . 
The airline had allowed them to move ahead of some union members in seniority following the 1985 strike , a move the union had contested in a previous lawsuit . 
Judith Valente contributed to this article . 
Corporate efforts to control health-care costs by requiring evaluations prior to planned hospitalization and surgery have n't been sweeping enough to reduce the long-term rate of cost increases , according to a study by the Institute of Medicine . 
In the last decade , many corporations have embraced the `` utilization management '' cost containment strategy as a way to control health-care costs for employees . 
These programs vary widely , but often require second opinions on proposed surgery , preadmission reviews of elective hospitalizations and reviews of treatment during illnesses or recovery periods . 
Between 50 % and 75 % of today 's workers are covered by such plans , up from 5 % five years ago . 
`` Although it probably has reduced the level of expenditures for some purchasers , utilization management -- like most other cost containment strategies -- does n't appear to have altered the long-term rate of increase in health-care costs , '' the Institute of Medicine , an affiliate of the National Academy of Sciences , concluded after a two-year study . 
`` Employers who saw a short-term moderation in benefit expenditures are seeing a return to previous trends . '' 
While utilization management frequently reduces hospitalization costs , these savings are often offset by increases in outpatient services and higher administrative costs , according to the report by a panel of health-care experts . 
The report suggested that current review programs are too narrow . 
`` The unnecessary and inappropriate use of the hospital , and not the actual need for a particular procedure , has been the main focus , '' the panel said . 
`` As a general rule , prior-review programs have not made case-by-case assessments of the comparative costs of alternative treatments or sites of care . '' 
The report said that utilization management should have more of an impact as federal research on the effectiveness of medical treatments helps lead to medical practice guidelines . 
Howard Bailit , a panel member and a vice president of Aetna Life & Casualty , said that utilization management will also do a better job of containing costs as it spreads to cover medical services delivered outside of hospitals . 
`` There 's pretty good evidence that utilization management has reduced inappropriate hospitalization , '' he said . 
But at the same time , spending on physician services and ambulatory care have mushroomed . 
`` It 's like squeezing a balloon , '' Dr. Bailit said . 
David Rahill of A. Foster Higgins & Co. said that clients of his consulting firm report that utilization management reduces their hospital care bills by about 5 % , but he agreed that for the health-care system as whole , some of these savings are offset by administrative and outpatient care costs . 
Jerome Grossman , chairman of the panel , agrees that administrative costs of utilization management programs can be high . 
`` You have a whole staff standing ready '' to evaluate the appropriateness of recommended treatment , he said . 
Dr. Grossman , who also is president of New England Medical Center Hospitals in Boston , noted that the hospitals he runs deal with more than 100 utilization management firms and that many of them have different procedures and requirements . 
The panel urged greater efforts to reduce the complexity , paperwork and cost of utilization review . 
`` Utilization management needs to better demonstrate that it reduces the wasteful use of resources , improves the appropriateness of patient care and imposes only reasonable burdens on patients and providers , '' the panel concluded . 
Renault and DAF Trucks NV announced a preliminary agreement to jointly manufacture a line of trucks in Britain and France . 
Philippe Gras , a Renault managing director , said the new line will cover trucks of between 2.5 tons and 4.2 tons and will be built at Renault 's Bapilly plant in France and at DAF 's British plant . 
The French state-controlled auto group and the Dutch truck maker plan to incorporate the new trucks into their product lines when they begin production toward the middle of the 1990s . 
Mr. Gras said he expects a definitive agreement between the two companies to be completed in the next few months . 
The venture is the latest example of the trend toward cooperative projects in Europe ahead of the 1992 deadline for eliminating trade barriers within the European Community . 
Renault and DAF are expected to invest a total of about three billion French francs ( $ 157.8 million ) in the venture , including FFr 1 billion for design and development costs . 
In addition , the companies will each spend about FFr 1 billion on tooling up their plants . 
Mr. Gras said the joint venture represents considerable savings for both Renault and DAF , since both companies would in any case have had to renew their existing ranges of light goods vehicles . 
By pooling their resources , the two groups have effectively halved the design and development costs that would otherwise have been entailed , he said . 
Renault officials said the potential European market for light trucks in the 2.5-ton to 4.2-ton range is between 700,000 and 800,000 vehicles annually , and Renault and DAF are aiming for a combined market share of about 11 % . 
Both Renault and DAF will have world-wide marketing rights for the new range of vans and light trucks . 
Under a separate arrangement , British Aerospace PLC 's Rover Group PLC subsidiary will also be able to offer the vehicles through its dealers in the U.K. , and Renault 's truck-building subsidiary Renault Vehicles Industriels will have similar rights in France . 
DAF is 16%-owned by British Aerospace , with a further 6.5 % held by the Dutch state-owned chemical group NV DSM . 
The van Doorne family of the Netherlands holds an additional 11 % of DAF 's capital . 
The Federal Reserve System is the standard object of suggestions for organizational and institutional changes , for two reasons . 
First , its position in the government is anomalous . 
It has an unusual kind of independence from elected officials and still has authority over one of the most powerful of government 's instruments -- the control of the money supply . 
Thus we have a condition that is easily described as undemocratic . 
Second , the responsibilities of the Federal Reserve as guardian of the currency , which means as guardian of the stability of the price level , sometimes lead it to take measures that are unpopular . 
As former Fed Chairman William McChesney Martin used to say , they would have to take the punch bowl away just as the party is getting interesting . 
So the Federal Reserve is an attractive target for complaint by politicians . 
The Fed is easily assigned the blame for unpleasantness , like high interest rates or slow economic growth , while the politicians can escape responsibility by pointing to the Fed 's independence . 
This leads to proposals for `` reform '' of the Fed , which have the common feature of making the Fed more responsive to the administration , to the Congress and to public opinion -- without , however , any assumption of additional responsibility by the politicians . 
These proposals include changing the term of the chairman , shortening the terms of the members , eliminating the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks from the decision-making process , putting the Secretary of the Treasury on the Federal Reserve Board , having the Fed audited by an arm of Congress ( the General Accounting Office ) , putting the Fed 's expenditures in the budget , and requiring prompt publication of the Fed 's minutes . 
Some of these ideas are again under consideration in Congress . 
But these proposals do not rest on a view of what the Fed 's problem is or , if they do , they rest on an incorrect view . 
They would not solve the problem ; they would make it worse . 
The problem is not that the Fed is too unresponsive to the public interest . 
On the contrary , it is too responsive to an incorrect view of the public interest . 
The price level in the U.S. is now about 4 1\/4 times as high as it was 30 years ago . 
On average , something that cost $ 100 30 years ago now costs $ 425 . 
Or , a wage that was $ 100 30 years ago would buy only $ 23.53 worth of stuff today . 
On two occasions the inflation rate rose to more than 10 % a year . 
In each case the ending of this unsustainable inflation caused a severe recession -- the two worst of the postwar period . 
The enormous inflation over the past 30 years was largely due to monetary policy . 
At least , it would not have happened without the support of monetary policy that provided for a 10-fold increase in the money supply during the same period . 
And that increase in the money supply would not have happened without the consent of the Federal Reserve . 
The basic problem of monetary policy , to which reform of the Fed should be addressed , is to prevent a recurrence of this experience . 
There were two general reasons for the mistaken monetary policy of the past 30 years : 
1 . To some extent the Federal Reserve shared the popular but incorrect view that expansionary monetary policy could yield a net improvement in employment and output . 
2 . Even where the Fed did not share this view it felt the need to accommodate to it . 
Despite all the formal provisions for its independence , the Fed seems constantly to feel that if it uses its independence too freely it will lose it . 
The common proposals for reforming the Fed would only make the situation worse , if they had any effect at all . 
Putting the Secretary of the Treasury on the Board of Governors , one of the leading proposals today , is an example . 
The secretary is the world 's biggest borrower of money . 
He has a built-in , constant longing for lower interest rates . 
Moreover , he is a political agent of a political president , who naturally gives extraordinary weight to the way the economy will perform before the next election , and less to its longer-run health . 
These days , the secretary suffers the further disqualification that he is a member of a club of seven finance ministers who meet occasionally to decide what exchange rates should be , which is a diversion from the real business of the Federal Reserve to stabilize the price level . 
How should a reasonable member of the Federal Reserve Board interpret a congressional decision to put the secretary on the board ? 
Could he plausibly interpret it as encouragement for the Fed to give primary emphasis to stabilizing the price level ? 
Or would he interpret it as instruction to give more weight to these other objectives that the secretary represents -- low interest rates , short-run economic expansion , and stabilization of exchange rates at internationally managed levels ? 
The answer seems perfectly clear . 
( True , a succession of Fed chairmen has given color to the notion that the Secretary of the Treasury belongs on the Fed . 
By their constant readiness to advise all and sundry about federal budgetary matters the chairmen have encouraged the belief that fiscal policy and monetary policy are ingredients of a common stew , in which case it is natural that the Fed and the Treasury , and probably also the Congress , should be jointly engaged in stirring the pot . 
The Fed 's case for its own independence would be a little stronger if it were more solicitous of the independence of the rest of the government . ) 
The Fed 's problem is not that it is too independent , or too unpolitical . 
The Fed is responsive to , and can not help being responsive to , the more overtly political part of the government . 
The Fed exercises a power given to it by Congress and the president . 
But Congress and the president accept no responsibility for the exercise of the power they have given the Fed . 
Critics of the present arrangement are correct to say that it is undemocratic . 
What is undemocratic is the unwillingness of the more political parts of the government to take the responsibility for deciding the basic question of monetary policy , which is what priority should be given to stabilizing the price level . 
To leave this decision to an `` independent '' agency is not only undemocratic . 
It also prevents the conduct of a policy that has a long-term rationale , because it leaves the Fed guessing about what are the expectations of its masters , the politicians , who have never had to consider the long-term consequences of monetary policy . 
The greatest contribution Congress could make at this time would be to declare that stabilizing the price level is the primary responsibility of the Federal Reserve System . 
Legislation to this effect has been introduced in Congress in this session by Rep. Stephen Neal ( D. , N.C . ) . 
It is not the kind of thing that is likely to be enacted , however . 
Congress would be required to make a hard decision , and Congress would much prefer to leave the hard decision to the Fed and retain its rights of complaint after the fact . 
People will say that the nation and the government have other objectives , in addition to stabilizing the price level , which is true . 
But that is not the same as saying that the Federal Reserve has other objectives . 
The government has other agencies and instruments for pursuing these other objectives . 
But it has only the Fed to pursue price-level stability . 
And the Fed has at most very limited ability to contribute to the achievement of other objectives by means other than by stabilizing the price level . 
The two objectives most commonly thought to be legitimate competitors for the attention of the Fed are high employment and rapid real growth . 
But the main lesson of economic policy in the past 30 years is that if the Fed compromises with the price-stability objective in the pursuit of these other goals , the result is not high employment and rapid growth but is inflation . 
A former chairman of the president 's Council of Economic Advisers , Mr. Stein is an American Enterprise Institute fellow . 
Republic New York Corp. joined the list of banks boosting reserves for losses on loans to less-developed countries , setting out a $ 200 million provision and posting a $ 155.4 million third-quarter net loss as a result . 
The per-share loss was $ 5.32 . 
In the year earlier period , the New York parent of Republic National Bank had net income of $ 38.7 million , or $ 1.12 a share . 
Excluding the provision , Republic earned $ 44.6 million , up 15 % from a year ago . 
The bank 's medium-term and long-term loans to less-developed countries total $ 293 million , of which $ 146 million are n't accruing interest , the bank said . 
Republic 's total of nonperforming assets was $ 167 million at Sept. 30 , with its reserve for loan losses now standing at $ 357 million . 
Abortion-rights advocates won last week 's battles , but the war over the nation 's most-contentious social question is about to pick up again on turf that favors those seeking to restrict abortions . 
Strict new regulations seem certain to pass the state House in Pennsylvania next week , with easy approval by the Senate and by Democratic Gov. Bob Casey expected shortly thereafter . 
Legislation to require the consent of parents before their daughters under the age of 18 can have abortions will probably pass both houses of the Michigan legislature and set up a grinding battle to override the expected veto of Democratic Gov. James Blanchard . 
The short-term shift in the political climate surrounding abortion reflects two factors that are likely to govern the debate in the next several months : the reawakening of the abortion-rights movement as a potent force after years of lassitude , and the ability of each side to counter the other 's advance in one arena with a victory of its own elsewhere . 
The action in Pennsylvania , for example , will follow last week 's collapse of a special session of the Florida legislature to enact restrictions on abortions in that state , and the vote here in Washington by the House to permit federally paid abortions for poor women who are victims of rape or incest . 
But President Bush is expected to veto the congressional legislation and that , along with the easy approval of the Pennsylvania measure , is likely to mute the abortion-rights activists ' claims of momentum and underline the challenges faced by this resurgent movement . 
`` It 's great to feel good for once in 15 years , '' says Harrison Hickman , a consultant to abortion-rights advocates , reflecting the relief of his compatriots after last week 's victories , the first major events since the Supreme Court , in its July 3 Webster decision , permitted the states to enact restrictions on abortions . 
`` But how many more times we 're going to feel good in the next 15 is another question . '' 
Indeed , abortion-rights activists still face their greatest tests . 
`` The pro-choice movement has shown -- finally -- that it can mobilize , '' says Glen Halva-Neubauer , a Furman University political scientist who specializes in how state legislators handle the abortion question . 
`` But it still has n't shown that it can win in a state like Pennsylvania or Missouri , where abortion has been clearly an electoral issue and where it 's been an emotional issue for a long time . '' 
The foes of abortion hold the strong whip hand in Pennsylvania , where abortion-rights activists are so much on the defensive that their strategy is less to fight the proposed legislation than it is to stress how the state legislature does n't reflect the viewpoints of the state 's citizens . 
As a result , GOP state Rep. Stephen Freind of Delaware County , the legislature 's leading foe of abortion , has been given all but free rein to press a strict seven-point plan to restrict abortion and , he hopes , to force the Supreme Court directly to reassess its 1973 Roe v. Wade decision that established the right of abortion in the first place . 
The Freind legislation -- the state 's House Judiciary Committee approved it in Harrisburg this week and the full Pennsylvania House is expected to take up the bill next Tuesday -- includes a provision to ban abortions after 24 weeks of pregnancy , except to avert the death of the mother . 
Mr. Freind calculates that the provision , which attacks the trimester standards that Roe established , will `` make it necessary '' for the Supreme Court to review Roe and , perhaps , to overturn it . 
But the Pennsylvania measure also includes an `` informed consent '' provision that may become widely imitated by abortion foes who want to make women contemplating abortion as uncomfortable as possible with the procedure and with themselves . 
Under this legislation , a woman must be informed 24 hours before the operation of the details of the procedure and its risks . 
`` Regardless of whether one supports or opposes the right to an abortion , '' Mr. Freind argues , `` it is virtually impossible for any rational human being to disagree with the concept that a woman has the right to have all of the appropriate materials and advice made available to her before she makes a decision which , one way or the other , might remain with her for the rest of her life . '' 
In Michigan , where the state Senate is expected to approve parental-consent legislation by the end of next week , Gov. Blanchard is the principal obstacle for anti-abortionists . 
Susan Rogin , a consultant to abortion-rights activists in the state , takes comfort from the fact that the state 's House abortion opponents `` have n't been able to muster the votes to overturn a veto on abortion in 16 years . '' 
But proponents believe they may be able to shake enough votes loose to override the veto if they are successful in portraying the legislation as a matter of parents ' rights . 
In Illinois , lawmakers will vote before next spring on legislation requiring physicians to perform tests on fetuses at 20 weeks to determine their gestational age , weight and lung maturity along with a provision requiring that , if fetuses survive an abortion , a second doctor must be on hand to help it survive . 
The legislation failed by one vote to clear the House Rules Committee Tuesday , but anti-abortionists still may succeed in bringing the measure to the floor this fall . 
Pamela Sutherland , executive director of the Illinois Planned Parenthood Council , says she and her allies are `` cautiously optimistic '' they can defeat it if it comes to a floor vote . 
Abortion foes in Wisconsin , meanwhile , expect a parental-consent bill to be sent to the state assembly floor by early November and are hopeful of prevailing in both houses by next March . 
In Texas , abortion opponents want to pass parental-consent legislation along with a statewide ban on the use of public funds , personnel and facilities for abortion , and viability tests for fetuses 19 weeks and older . 
The anti-abortionists are urging GOP Gov. Bill Clements to press the issues in a special session scheduled to run Nov. 14 to Dec. 13 . 
`` The prognosis is only fair , '' says Kathie Roberts , administrative director of the Texas Right to Life Committee . 
`` Next year is an election year and the legislators just do n't want to do anything about this now . '' 
This legislative activity comes as both sides are undertaking new mobilization efforts , plunging into gubernatorial races in Virginia and New Jersey , and girding for next autumn 's state elections . 
At the same time , abortion foes have developed a national legislative strategy , deciding to move on what Jacki Ragan , the National Right to Life Committee 's director of state organizational development , calls `` reasonable measures that an overwhelming mainstream majority of Americans support . '' 
These include bans on the use of abortion for birth control and sex selection , and the public funding of alternatives for abortion . 
`` Those who are on the other side can hardly oppose alternative funding if they continue to insist on calling themselves ` pro-choice ' rather than ` pro-abortion , ' '' says Mary Spaulding , the group 's associate state legislative coordinator . 
Over the weekend , the National Abortion Rights Action League singled out eight politicians , including Pennsylvania 's Mr. Freind , as 1990 targets and held a Washington seminar designed to train its leaders in political techniques , including how to put the anti-abortionists on the defensive in state legislatures . 
`` We now see pro-choice legislators going on the offensive for the first time , '' says Kate Michelman , executive director of the group . 
Wall Street 
When I was just a child And confronted by my fears , The things that I thought would get me Had fangs and pointed ears . 
Nothing much has changed -- My periodic scares Are still from hostile animals , Only now , they 're bulls and bears . 
-- Pat D'Amico . 
Daffynition 
Trained dolphins : pur-poises . 
-- Marrill J. Pederson . 
This maker and marketer of cartridge tape systems said it completed the sale of 2.85 million shares of common priced at $ 10 a share in an initial public offering . 
The company said that it is selling two million shares and that the rest are being sold by certain stockholders . 
Proceeds will be used for capital expenditures and working capital . 
Goldman , Sachs & Co. and Montgomery Securities Inc. are co-managing the offering . 
Congress sent President Bush an $ 18.4 billion fiscal 1990 Treasury and Postal Service bill providing $ 5.5 billion for the Internal Revenue Service and increasing the Customs Service 's air-interdiction program nearly a third . 
Final approval came on a simple voice vote in the Senate , and the swift passage contrasted with months of negotiations over the underlying bill which is laced with special-interest provisions for both members and the executive branch . 
An estimated $ 33 million was added for university and science grants , including $ 1.5 million for Smith College . 
And Southwest lawmakers were a driving force behind $ 54.6 million for U.S.-Mexico border facilities , or more than double the administration 's request . 
More than $ 1.8 million is allocated for pensions and expenses for former presidents , and the budget for the official residence of Vice President Quayle is more than doubled , with $ 200,000 designated for improvements to the property . 
Even the Office of Management and Budget is remembered with an extra $ 1 million to help offset pay costs that other government departments are being asked to absorb . 
Within the IRS , nearly $ 1.95 billion is provided for processing tax returns , a 12 % increase over fiscal 1989 and double what the government was spending five years ago . 
Investigation and taxpayer service accounts would grow to $ 1.6 billion , and Congress specifically added $ 7.4 million for stepped up criminal investigations of money laundering related to drug traffic . 
The large increase in Customs Service air-interdiction funds is also intended to counter smuggling , and the annual appropriations level has more than quadrupled in five years . 
The $ 196.7 million provided for fiscal 1990 anticipates the purchase of a Lockheed P-3 surveillance aircraft and five Cessna Citation II jets . 
Despite administration reservations , the plan has had the quiet backing of customs officials as well as influential lawmakers from Cessna 's home state , Kansas . 
Among legislative provisions attached to the bill is a ban on any Treasury Department expenditure for enforcement of a 1986 tax provision intended to counter discrimination in employee-benefit plans . 
Small-business interests have lobbied against the so-called Section 89 tax rules . 
Repeal is considered likely now , but the Treasury Department bill has been used as a vehicle to raise the profile of the issue and block any action in the interim . 
Less noticed is a bit of legislative legerdemain by Houston Republicans on behalf of HEI Corp. of Texas to retroactively `` move '' a Missouri hospital from one county to the next to justify higher Medicare reimbursements . 
The provision seeks to wipe out an estimated $ 1.4 million in claims made by the Health Care Finance Administration against HEI , which owned the hospital in Sullivan , Mo. , during most of the four-year period -- 1983-1987 -- covered in the amendment . 
In a separate development , a private meeting is scheduled this morning between House Appropriations Committee Chairman Jamie Whitten ( D. , Miss . ) and Sen. Dale Bumpers ( D. , Ark . ) in an effort to end a dispute which for two weeks has delayed action on an estimated $ 44 billion agriculture bill . 
A House-Senate conference reached agreement Oct. 5 on virtually all major provisions of the bill , but final settlement has been stalled because of differences between the two men over the fate of a modest Arkansas-based program to provide technical information to farmers seeking to reduce their dependence on chemical fertilizers and pesticides . 
The program 's nonprofit sponsors received $ 900,000 in fiscal 1989 through an Extension Service grant , but Mr. Whitten has been adamant in insisting that the program be cut in 1990 . 
The 79-year-old Mississippian takes a more orthodox , entrenched view of agriculture policy than those in the movement to reduce chemical use , but as a master of pork-barrel politics , he is believed to be annoyed as well that the project moved to Arkansas from a Tennessee center near Memphis and the northern Mississippi border . 
Michael F. Klatman , director of corporate public relations at Data General Corp. , was named to the new position of vice president , corporate communications , of this maker of data storage equipment . 
B.A.T Industries PLC may delay aspects of its defensive restructuring plan -- including the sale of its Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field units -- in the wake of the current upheaval in financial markets , company officials said . 
The British conglomerate , planning its own defensive restructuring to fight off a # 13.35 billion ( $ 21.03 billion ) takeover bid by Anglo-French financier Sir James Goldsmith , intends to press ahead with an extraordinary shareholder vote today to clear the way for its value-boosting measures . 
If anything , the gyrations in world stock markets -- and in B.A.T 's share price -- since last Friday 's sharp Wall Street sell-off have increased the likelihood of shareholder approval for the restructuring , analysts and several big institutional holders said . 
`` Thank God we have some deal on the table , '' said Stewart Gilchrist , a director at Scottish Amicable Investment Managers , which intends to vote its roughly 1 % stake in favor of the restructuring . 
Investors in B.A.T have been on a roller coaster . 
B.A.T has been London 's best-performing blue chip over the past six months , up 40 % against a 4 % rise in the Financial Times 100-Share Index . 
But this week , B.A.T has been hit harder than other big U.K. stocks -- first by the market gyrations , then by Tuesday 's San Francisco earthquake , which could leave B.A.T 's Farmers Group Inc. insurance unit facing big claims . 
B.A.T rose five pence ( eight cents ) to 756 pence ( $ 11.91 ) in London yesterday as a late market rally erased a 28-pence fall earlier in the day . 
To fight off predators , B.A.T plans to spin off about $ 6 billion in assets , largely by selling such U.S. retailing units as Marshall Field and Saks and by floating its big paper and U.K. retailing business via share issues to existing holders . 
Proceeds will help pay for a planned buy-back of 10 % of its shares and a 50 % dividend increase . 
`` I think the restructuring will get the required support , '' said Michael Pacitti , an analyst at London stockbroker UBS Phillips & Drew . 
`` The shareholders effectively will support the share price by clearing the share buy-back . '' 
But B.A.T 's restructuring , which was never going to happen quickly , now will take longer because of the market upheaval . 
Company officials , holders and analysts who previously expected the disposals to be substantially complete by the end of next year 's first half now say the market gyrations could delay the actions well into the second half . 
`` We are n't forced sellers . 
We do n't have an absolute deadline and if market conditions are truly awful we might decide it is not the right time , '' to take particular steps , said Michael Prideaux , a B.A.T spokesman . 
Even if B.A.T receives approval for the restructuring , the company will remain in play , say shareholders and analysts , though the situation may unfold over the next 12 months , rather than six . 
The new B.A.T will be a smaller tobacco and financial-services hybrid whose price-earnings ratio may more closely reflect the lower-growth tobacco business than the higher-multiple financial-services business , these holders believe . 
Thus B.A.T 's restructuring may only make the company a more manageable target for other corporate predators -- possibly such acquisitive bidders as Hanson PLC . 
`` The last few days will surely slow down the pace of events , '' says Scottish Amicable 's Mr. Gilchrist . 
`` But I would n't write off '' Sir James or other potential bidders . 
Among possible delays , the sales of Saks and Marshall Field -- which were expected to be on the block soon after the crucial Christmas season -- may slide into the second quarter or second half . 
Analysts estimate that sales of the two businesses could raise roughly $ 2 billion . 
B.A.T is n't predicting a postponement because the units `` are quality businesses and we are encouraged by the breadth of inquiries , '' said Mr. Prideaux . 
But the delay could happen if B.A.T does n't get adequate bids , he said . 
People familiar with B.A.T say possible acquirers for the units include managers from both retailing chains , and General Cinema Corp. , which is interested in bidding for Saks . 
Other potential bidders for parts of B.A.T 's U.S. retail unit include Dillard Department Stores Inc. , May Department Stores Co. and Limited Inc . 
B.A.T has declined to identify the potential bidders . 
Though Sir James has said he intends to mount a new bid for B.A.T once approval from U.S. insurance regulators is received , jitters over prospects for junk-bond financing and U.S. leverage buy-outs are making investors more skeptical about Sir James 's prospects . 
His initial offer indicated he needed to raise as much as 80 % of the takeover financing through the debt markets . 
Market uncertainty also clouds the outlook for B.A.T 's attracting a premium price for its U.S. retailing properties . 
Finally , Tuesday 's California earthquake initially knocked 3.7 % off B.A.T 's share price in London yesterday because of fears of the potential claims to Los Angeles-based Farmers , which has a substantial portion of its property and casualty exposure in California . 
On Farmers , Mr. Prideaux said it is too early to quantify the level of potential claims . 
He added B.A.T `` has no expectation of a material impact on Farmers . 
Bridge and highway collapses will disrupt truck and auto transportation in the San Francisco Bay area for months to come . 
But rail , air and ocean-shipping links to the area escaped Tuesday 's earthquake with only minor damage , and many are expected to be operating normally today , government and corporate transport officials said . 
Air traffic at San Francisco International Airport was running about 50 % of normal yesterday afternoon , but airport officals said they expect a return to full operations by Saturday . 
The major gateway to Asia and one of the nation 's 10 busiest airports was closed to all but emergency traffic from the time the quake hit Tuesday afternoon , until 6 a.m. PDT yesterday when controllers returned to the tower . 
Getting to and from the airport in coming weeks may be the problem , however . 
`` People 's ability to drive throughout the bay area is greatly restricted , '' said a spokesman for the American Automobile Association . 
Tom Schumacher , executive vice president and general manager of the California Trucking Association in Sacremento , said his organization urged trucking firms to halt all deliveries into the Bay area yesterday , except for emergency-medical supplies . 
`` Some foodstuff shipments will probably resume Thursday , '' he said . 
`` Right now most of the roads into the Bay area are closed , but the list of closings changes about every 20 minutes . 
This { Wednesday } morning the San Mateo bridge was open and now we are informed that it is closed , '' Mr. Schumacher said . 
United Parcel Service , Greenwich , Conn. , said its operations in the San Francisco area have been reduced to 40 % of normal . 
A UPS spokesman said that although none of the company 's terminals , trucks or airplanes were damaged in the quake , road shutdowns and power failures have impeded its pickup and delivery of packages . 
The spokesman noted four-hour to five-hour traffic delays on the San Mateo bridge , for example . 
In addition , power failures prevented its package-sorting facilities from operating , causing delays . 
But freight railroads reported that damage to their facilities was relatively minor , with Santa Fe Pacific Corp. 's rail unit the least affected by the quake . 
Santa Fe stopped freight trains Tuesday night while its officials inspected track but resumed service at 10:45 p.m. when they found no damage . 
Union Pacific Corp. 's rail unit said that except for damage to shipping containers in its Oakland yard , its track , bridges and structures were unharmed . 
That railroad is operating trains but with delays caused by employees unable to get to work . 
Southern Pacific Transportation Co. , the hardest hit of the three railroads in the Bay area , said service on its north-south coastline , which is used by an Amtrak train between Los Angeles and Seattle , was suspended temporarily because of kinked rails near the epicenter of the quake . 
But service on the line is expected to resume by noon today . 
`` We had no serious damage on the railroad , '' said a Southern Pacific spokesman . 
`` We have no problem to our freight service at all expect for the fact businesses are shut down . '' 
Amtrak said it suspended train service into its Oakland station , which sustained `` heavy structural damage '' during the quake . 
The passenger railroad said it terminated some runs in Sacramento , relying on buses to ferry passengers to the Bay area . 
Amtrak said it planned to resume some train operations to Oakland late yesterday . 
Rail-transit operations suffered little damage , according to Albert Engelken , deputy executive director of the American Public Transit Association in Washington . 
The Bay Area Rapid Transit `` withstood the earthquake perfectly , '' said Mr. Engelken , adding that the rail system was running a full fleet of 45 trains during the day to provide an alternative for highway travelers . 
`` The highway system is screwed up '' by the earthquake , Mr. Engelken said . 
`` The transit system is how people are going to be getting around . '' 
He added that San Francisco 's trolley cars and trolley buses were also running at full service levels . 
Although air-traffic delays in San Francisco were significant yesterday , they did n't appear to spread to other airports . 
The earthquake shattered windows at San Francisco International 's air-traffic control tower and rained pieces of the ceiling down on controllers , three of whom suffered minor injuries . 
Terminals at San Francisco International also were damaged , but the tower itself was intact . 
Tuesday night , thousands were diverted to other airports and had to wait a day to resume travel . 
Runways at San Francisco were n't damaged , but traffic was being limited yesterday to 27 arrivals and 27 departures an hour -- down from 33 to 45 an hour normally -- mainly because the noise level in the control tower was overwhelming without the windows , an FAA spokeswoman said . 
While the airport was closed , flights were diverted to airports in Sacramento and Stockton , Calif. ; Reno and Las Vegas , Nev. ; and Los Angeles . 
United Airlines , the largest carrier at San Francisco , was operating only 50 % of its scheduled service in and out of the area because of damage to its terminal , which in turn was causing delays for travelers headed to the Bay area . 
A United spokesman said 14 of its 21 gates were unusable , mainly because of water damage caused when a sprinkler system was triggered by the tremors . 
The United spokesman said none of its people were injured at the airport ; in fact , as the airport was being evacuated Tuesday night , two babies were born . 
Yesterday , the United ticket counter was active , with people trying to get flights out , but the airline said demand for seats into the city also was active , with people trying to get there to help family and friends . 
The airports in San Jose and Oakland were both fully operational by noon yesterday , the Federal Aviation Administration said . 
In terms of diversions , Denver 's Stapleton International may have experienced the most far-flung : A United flight from Japan was rerouted there . 
`` I think that 's the first nonstop commercial passenger flight from Japan to land here , '' an airport spokesman said . 
A Japan Air Lines spokesman said its flights into and out of San Francisco were n't affected , but getting information about its operations was difficult . 
Its telecommunications headquarters in Burlingame , Calif. , had been knocked out since the quake . 
`` We 're in the dark , '' he said . 
Whitbread & Co. put its spirits division up for sale , triggering a scramble among global groups for the British company 's brands . 
Whitbread already has been approached by `` about half a dozen '' companies interested in buying all or part of the spirits business , a spokesman said . 
Analysts expect the spirits operations and some California vineyards that also are being sold to fetch about # 500 million ( $ 788.8 million ) . 
Among the brands for sale are Beefeater gin , the No. 2 imported gin in the U.S. , and Laphroaig single-malt whiskey . 
Also for sale are Buckingham Wile Co. , which distributes Cutty Sark blended whiskey in the U.S. , and Whitbread 's Atlas Peak Vineyards in California 's Napa Valley . 
Beefeater alone is worth as much as # 300 million , analysts said . 
Whitbread bought the Beefeater distillery two years ago for # 174.5 million . 
That purchase represented an attempt by Whitbread , a venerable British brewer , to become a major player in the global liquor business . 
But Whitbread has been squeezed by giant rivals amid widespread consolidation in the industry . 
Now , it wants to concentrate on beer and its newer hotel and restaurant operations . 
For rival liquor companies , the Whitbread auction is a rare opportunity to acquire valuable brands . 
`` It 's not very often something like this comes up , '' said Ron Littleboy , a liquor company analyst at Nomura Research Institute in London . 
`` The division will be sold off quite rapidly , '' predicted Neill Junor , an analyst at London brokers County NatWest WoodMac . 
Among possible buyers , Grand Metropolitan PLC might find Beefeater a useful addition to its portfolio . 
Grand Met owns Bombay gin , the No. 3 imported gin in the U.S. ; rival Guinness PLC has the No. 1 imported brand , Tanqueray . 
The Whitbread spirits auction `` is an extremely interesting development ... and naturally we 'll be considering it carefully , '' a Grand Met spokesman said . 
Guinness , which owns several leading whiskey brands plus Gordon 's gin , the world 's No. 1 gin , is considered less likely to bid for the Whitbread spirits . 
A Guinness spokesman declined to comment . 
Two other global liquor giants , Canada 's Seagram Co. and Britain 's Allied-Lyons PLC , also are possible buyers . 
Seagram 's gin is the world 's No. 2 gin brand , but the company does n't own any of the major gin brands imported in the U.S. . 
Allied-Lyons , while powerful in whiskey , does n't own any major white-spirit brands . 
`` We will certainly have to take a look at '' the Whitbread spirits business , an Allied-Lyons spokesman said . 
`` We would certainly like to have a major white-spirits brand in our portfolio . '' 
A Seagram spokesman in New York would n't comment . 
Smaller liquor companies , such as Brown-Forman Corp. and American Brands Inc. of the U.S. , also are likely to be interested . 
Such companies `` are increasingly being left behind '' in the global liquor business , says Nomura 's Mr. Littleboy . 
In New York , a spokesman for American Brands would n't comment . 
Brown-Forman , a Louisville , Ky. distiller , also declined to comment . 
Whitbread 's wine , spirits and soft-drink operations had trading profit of # 35.4 million on sales of # 315.5 million in the year ended Feb. 25 . 
The company , which is retaining most of its wine and all of its soft-drink interests , did n't break out results for the businesses it plans to sell . 
But analysts estimate their trading profit at # 30 million . 
Whitbread had total pretax profit in the year ended Feb. 25 of # 223.2 million , on sales of # 2.26 billion . 
Whitbread 's spirits auction occurs amid a parallel shakeup in the British beer industry . 
Earlier this year , the government announced plans to foster increased competition in the industry . 
British brewers currently own thousands of pubs , which in turn sell only the breweries ' beer and soft drinks . 
Under new rules , many of the country 's pubs would become `` free houses , '' selling beers of their choice . 
Whitbread now intends to bolster its brewing interests , in an effort to grab a share of sales to free houses . 
The company , which last month paid # 50.7 million for regional British brewer Boddington Group PLC , has about 13 % of the British beer market . 
Whitbread also owns the license to brew and distribute Heineken and Stella Artois beers in Britain . 
In addition , Whitbread intends to focus on its newer hotel , liquor store and restaurant businesses in Europe and North America . 
In Britain , those interests include the Beefeater steakhouse chain and joint ownership with PepsiCo Inc. of the country 's Pizza Hut chain . 
In Canada and the U.S. , Whitbread owns The Keg chain of steak and seafood restaurants . 
Focusing on beer , restaurants and hotels means `` we can concentrate our skills and resources more effectively , '' Peter Jarvis , Whitbread 's managing director , said in a statement . 
The spirits business `` would require substantial additional investment to enable it to compete effectively in the first division of global players . '' 
Whitbread also announced that Mr. Jarvis , who is 48 , will become the company 's chief executive March 1 . 
At that time Sam Whitbread , the company 's chairman and a descendant of its 18th-century founder , will retire from executive duties . 
He will retain the honorary title of non-executive chairman . 
The Treasury plans to raise $ 700 million in new cash with the sale Tuesday of about $ 10 billion in two-year notes to redeem $ 9.29 billion in maturing notes . 
The offering will be dated Oct. 31 and mature Oct. 31 , 
Tenders for the notes , available in minimum $ 5,000 denominations , must be received by 1 p.m. EDT Tuesday at the Treasury or at Federal Reserve banks or branches . 
NEWHALL LAND & FARMING Co. , Valencia , Calif. , announced a 2-for-1 split in the real estate limited partnership 's units and increased its regular quarterly cash distribution 33 % , to 40 cents a unit . 
The real estate limited partnership also said it will pay a special year-end cash distribution of 10 cents a unit . 
Both distributions are payable Dec. 4 to limited partners of record Nov. 3 . 
Mellon Bank Corp. said directors authorized the buy-back of as many as 250,000 common shares . 
The bank holding company said stock repurchased will be used to meet requirements for the company 's benefit plans . 
Mellon has 36.6 million shares outstanding . 
Champion International Corp. 's third-quarter profit dropped 17 % , reflecting price declines for certain paper products , operating problems at certain mills , and other factors . 
The paper producer reported that net income fell to $ 102.1 million , or $ 1.09 a share , from $ 122.4 million , or $ 1.29 a share , in the year-earlier period . 
Sales rose 2.6 % to $ 1.32 billion from $ 1.29 billion . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Champion 's shares rose 25 cents to $ 32.125 . 
Digital Equipment Corp. is planning a big coming-out party on Tuesday for its first line of mainframe computers . 
But an uninvited guest is expected to try to crash the party . 
On the morning of the long-planned announcement , International Business Machines Corp. is to introduce its own new mainframe . 
`` Their attitude is , ` You want to talk mainframes , we 'll talk mainframes , ' '' says one computer industry executive . 
`` They 're deliberately trying to steal our thunder , '' a Digital executive complains . 
`` Maybe we should take it as a compliment . '' 
Digital 's target is the $ 40 billion market for mainframe computers , the closet-sized number-crunchers that nearly every big company needs to run its business . 
IBM , based in Armonk , N.Y. , has dominated the market for decades . 
That does n't scare Digital , which has grown to be the world 's second-largest computer maker by poaching customers of IBM 's mid-range machines . 
Digital , based in Maynard , Mass. , hopes to stage a repeat performance in mainframes , and it has spent almost $ 1 billion developing the new technology . 
A spoiler , nimble Tandem Computers Inc. in Cupertino , Calif. , jumped into the fray earlier this week with an aggressively priced entry . 
IBM appears more worried about Digital , which has a broad base of customers waiting for the new line , dubbed the VAX 9000 . 
`` It 's going to be nuclear war , '' says Thomas Willmott , a consultant with Aberdeen Group Inc . 
The surge in competition is expected to stir new life into the huge mainframe market , where growth has slowed to single digits in recent years . 
IBM 's traditional mainframe rivals , including Unisys Corp. , Control Data Corp. and NCR Corp. , have struggled recently . 
Digital is promising a new approach . 
Robert M. Glorioso , Digital 's vice president for high performance systems , says Digital 's mainframe is designed not as a central computer around which everything revolves , but as part of a decentralized network weaving together hundreds of workstations , personal computers , printers and other devices . 
And unlike IBM 's water-cooled mainframes , it does n't need any plumbing . 
The challengers will have a big price advantage . 
Digital is expected to tag its new line from about $ 1.24 million to $ 4.4 million and up , depending on configuration . 
That 's about half the price of comparably equipped IBM mainframes . 
Tandem 's pricing is just as aggressive . 
The heightened competition will hit IBM at a difficult time . 
The computer giant 's current mainframe line , which has sold well and has huge profit margins , is starting to show its age . 
The new 3090s due next week will boost performance by only about 8 % to 10 % . 
And IBM is n't expected to deliver a new generation of mainframes until 1991 . 
Still , no one expects IBM 's rivals to deliver a knockout . 
IBM has a near-monopoly on mainframes , with an estimated 70 % share of the market . 
IBM is five times the size of Digital -- and 40 times the size of Tandem -- and wields enormous market power . 
It counts among its customers a majority of the world 's largest corporations , which entrust their most critical business information to IBM computers . 
`` We 're not going to walk in and replace a company 's corporate accounting system if it 's already running on an IBM mainframe , '' concedes Kenneth H. Olsen , Digital 's president . 
He says Digital will target faster-growing market segments such as on-line transaction processing , which includes retail-sales tracking , airline reservations and bank-teller networks . 
Tandem , which already specializes in on-line transaction processing , is a potent competitor in that market . 
A key marketing target for Digital will be the large number of big customers who already own both Digital and IBM systems . 
One such company is Bankers Trust Co . 
Stanley Rose , a vice president , technological and strategic planning at Bankers Trust , says that despite Digital 's low prices , `` we are n't about to unplug our IBM mainframes for a DEC machine . 
The software conversion costs would dwarf any savings . '' 
But Mr. Rose is still looking seriously at the 9000 . 
Bankers Trust uses Digital 's VAX to run its huge money-transfer and capital markets accounts , juggling hundreds of billions of dollars each day , he says . 
As that system grows , larger computers may be needed . 
`` In the past , customers had to go to IBM when they outgrew the VAX . 
Now they do n't have to , '' he says . 
`` That 's going to cost IBM revenue . '' 
Analysts say Digital can expect this pent-up demand for the new VAX to fuel strong sales next year . 
Barry F. Willman , an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. , estimates the 9000 could boost sales by more than $ 1 billion in the fiscal year beginning in July . 
He bases the estimate on a survey of hundreds of Digital 's largest customers . 
Although Digital will announce a full family of mainframes next week , it is n't expected to begin shipping in volume until next year . 
The first model available will be the 210 , which is likely to appeal to many technical and scientific buyers interested in the optional super-charger , or vector processor , says Terry Shannon of International Data Corp. , a market research concern . 
Four more models , aimed squarely at IBM 's commercial customers , are expected to begin shipping in late June . 
Most analysts do n't expect the new mainframes to begin contributing significantly to revenue before the fiscal first quarter , which begins next July 1 . 
Digital 's new line has been a long time coming . 
The company has long struggled to deliver a strong mainframe-class product , and made a costly decision in 1988 to halt development of an interim product meant to stem the revenue losses at the high end . 
Digital 's failure to deliver a true mainframe-class machine before now may have cost the company as much as $ 1 billion in revenue in fiscal 1989 , Mr. Willman says . 
IBM will face still more competition in coming months . 
Amdahl Corp. , backed by Japan 's Fujitsu Ltd. , has a growing share of the market with its low-priced , IBM-compatible machines . 
And National Advanced Systems , a joint venture of Japan 's Hitachi Ltd. and General Motors Corp. 's Electronic Data Systems , is expected to unveil a line of powerful IBM-compatible mainframes later this year . 
NOTE : 
NAS is National Advanced Systems , CDC -- Control Data Corp. , Bull NH Information Systems Inc . 
Source : International Data Corp . 
Compiled by Publishers Weekly from data from large-city bookstores , bookstore chains and local bestseller lists across the U.S. . 
Copyright 1989 by Reed Publishing USA . 
The frenetic stock and bond markets cooled off , but the dollar slumped . 
Stocks rose slightly as trading activity slowed from the frenzied pace earlier this week . 
Prices of long-term Treasury bonds hovered in a narrow band most of the day , finishing little changed despite the dollar 's weakness and fears about a wave of government borrowing coming soon . 
Helped by futures-related program buying , the Dow Jones Industrial Average gained 4.92 points to close at 2643.65 . 
But the Dow Jones Transportation Average fell for the seventh-consecutive session as more investors dumped UAL shares . 
Bond prices rallied early yesterday morning as traders scrambled to buy Treasury issues on fears that the Northern California earthquake might lead to a stock-market debacle . 
But when stocks held steady , Treasury bonds later retreated . 
Speculation that the Federal Reserve will lower interest rates in coming weeks helped push the dollar down while boosting stocks , traders said . 
But many investors remain wary about stocks , partly because they expect continued turbulence in the junk-bond market that would make it more difficult to finance corporate takeovers . 
`` I 'm surprised we did n't see more volatility '' in stocks , said Raymond F. DeVoe Jr. , market strategist at Legg Mason Wood Walker . 
`` I think the problems in the junk-bond area are just beginning , and this will be very unsettling for companies that have issued junk bonds . 
In a bull market , credit does not matter , '' Mr. DeVoe added . 
`` But when it does matter , then it 's the only thing that matters . '' 
However , many institutional investors are reacting to the stock market 's plunge as `` a great buying opportunity , '' said Charles I. Clough , chief investment strategist at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets . 
`` Things are beginning to settle down . 
The markets are returning to normalcy . '' 
Oil prices initially rose on fears that the massive earthquake in Northern California would disrupt production . 
But prices later reversed course , finishing slightly lower , as investors concluded that any cuts would n't be large and that foreign oil producers would quickly pick up the slack . 
In major market activity : 
Stock prices rose . 
New York Stock Exchange volume shrank to 166.9 million shares from 224.1 million Tuesday . 
Advancers on the Big Board outpaced decliners by 822 to 668 . 
Bond prices were little changed in sluggish activity . 
The yield on the Treasury 's 30-year issue fell slightly to 8.03 % . 
The dollar dropped . 
In New York late yesterday , the currency was at 141.45 yen and 1.8485 marks , down from 142.75 yen and 1.8667 marks late Tuesday . 
James L. Madson , 46 years old , was named a vice president and assistant general manager of this producer of copper and other minerals . 
He will succeed Arthur E. Himebaugh as general manager Feb. 1 , when Mr. Himebaugh retires . 
AMR Corp. posted an 8.8 % drop in third-quarter net income and said the fourth quarter will be `` disappointing '' as well , primarily because of slimmer profit margins and increased fuel costs . 
AMR 's earnings decline comes a year after the parent company of American Airlines and the rest of the airline industry set profit records . 
Some analysts say the latest results only seem pale by comparison with a spectacular second half of 1988 . 
Still , AMR 's stumble does n't bode well for the rest of the industry . 
The Fort Worth , Texas , company is generally regarded as one of the best-run in the business , and its difficulties are likely to be reflected industrywide as other major carriers report third-quarter results over the next several days . 
Meanwhile , the company 's board , which had said nothing publicly about investor Donald Trump 's recently withdrawn $ 7.5 billion offer for AMR , issued a statement condemning `` ill-conceived and reckless '' bids and saying it was `` pleased '' that Mr. Trump had backed out . 
In the third quarter , AMR said , net fell to $ 137 million , or $ 2.16 a share , from $ 150.3 million , or $ 2.50 a share . 
Revenue rose 17 % to $ 2.73 billion from $ 2.33 billion a year earlier . 
AMR 's chairman , Robert L. Crandall , said the results were due to an 11 % year-to-year increase in fuel prices and a slight decrease in yield , an industry measure analogous to profit margin on each seat sold . 
`` We think these trends will continue and will produce a very disappointing fourth quarter as well , '' he said . 
Tim Pettee , an analyst with Merrill Lynch & Co. , said : `` The business turned faster than expected . 
Costs are giving them a little bit of trouble , and the whole industry is having a pricing problem . '' 
For the nine months , AMR 's net rose 15 % to $ 415.9 million , or $ 6.59 a share , from $ 360.1 million , or $ 5.99 a share . 
Revenue jumped 22 % to $ 7.89 billion from $ 6.46 billion . 
AMR 's board , in a statement after a regular meeting yesterday , said : `` Ill-considered and reckless acquisition proposals adversely affect employee , financial and business relationships and are contrary to the best interests of AMR shareholders ... . 
AMR has not been , and is not , for sale . '' 
Mr. Crandall said the company 's current decline in earnings is exactly the kind of situation that an excessively leveraged company laden with debt from a takeover would find difficult to weather . 
`` Our very disappointing third-quarter results and the discouraging outlook for the fourth quarter underscore the importance of an adequate capital base , '' he said . 
Christopher Whittington , 51-year-old deputy chairman of this British investment-banking group and chairman of Morgan Grenfell & Co. , the group 's main banking unit , has retired from his executive duties . 
Succeeding Mr. Whittington as deputy chairman of the group is Anthony Richmond-Watson , 43 , currently a main board member . 
Succeeding Mr. Whittington at Morgan Grenfell & Co. is Richard Webb , 50 , currently deputy chairman . 
Mr. Whittington will remain on the main group board as a nonexecutive director . 
Without federal subsidies to developers of beach houses , the economic and structural damage by Hurricane Hugo in South Carolina would have been much less , as highlighted by your Oct. 3 editorial `` Subsidizing Disaster . '' 
Congress should stop throwing tax dollars out to sea by subsidizing the development of beach communities on ecologically fragile coastal barrier islands , such as the hard-hit Isle of Palms near Charleston . 
As you mentioned , subsidies for development on a number of barrier islands were curtailed in 1982 by the Coastal Barrier Resource System . 
The National Taxpayers Union would like Congress to add 800,000 acres to the 453,000 of shoreline in the system by enacting `` The Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1989 . '' 
This bill simply says that if you want to develop property on a barrier island you have to do so without taxpayer support . 
Private-property rights would be upheld because the legislation would not ban coastal development . 
However , home builders would have to bear the full costs of such beach-house construction . 
A Taxpayers Union study concluded the bill would save taxpayers up to $ 9.3 billion in barrier-island subsidies over 20 years . 
Already , the 1982 legislation has saved an estimated $ 800 million . 
Marshall Y. Taylor 
Communications Director 
National Taxpayers Union 
The government said 13.1 % of Americans , or 31.9 million people , were living in poverty in 1988 . 
While last year 's figure was down from 13.4 % in 1987 and marked the fifth consecutive annual decline in the poverty rate , the Census Bureau said the 1988 drop was n't statistically significant . 
The bureau 's report also showed that while some measures of the nation 's economic well-being improved modestly in 1988 , the fruits of prosperity were shared less equitably than the year before . 
Summarizing data derived from a March 1989 survey of 58,000 households , William Butz , associate director of the Census Bureau , said that `` most groups either stayed the same or improved . '' 
But , he added , `` Since the late 1960s , the distribution of income has been slowly getting less equal . 
There was no reversal { of that trend } between 1987 and 1988 . '' 
Per capita income , a widely used measure of a nation 's economic health , hit a record in 1988 , rising 1.7 % after inflation adjustment to $ 13,120 . 
But the median income of American families fell 0.2 % , the first time it has failed to rise since 1982 . 
Mr. Butz said the divergence in the two measures reflects changes in family size and structure , including the rising number of female-headed families and a sharp increase in income reported by Americans who are n't living in families . 
As a result of last year 's decline , the government 's estimate for the number of people living below the poverty line declined by about 500,000 . 
The poverty threshold , defined as three times food expenses as calculated by the Agricultural Department , last year was $ 12,092 for a family of four . 
The Census Bureau counts all cash income in determining whether families are below the line , but it does n't consider other government benefits , such as Medicare . 
Thanks largely to the continued growth of the U.S. economy , the poverty rate is now substantially lower than the 1983 peak of 15.3 % , but the improvements have been modest in the past couple of years . 
Poverty remains far more widespread among blacks than other Americans . 
In 1988 , 31.6 % of blacks lived in poverty , compared with 10.1 % for whites and 26.8 % for Hispanics . 
But two-thirds of all poor Americans were white . 
More than half of poor families were headed by women living without men , the bureau said . 
More than three-fourths of poor black families were headed by women . 
The poverty rate of children under 18 years old dropped last year to 19.7 % from 20.5 % in 1987 , but remained far higher than a decade ago . 
The rate among the elderly -- 12 % in 1988 -- was n't significantly lower than the year before . 
If it were n't for Social Security payments , more than three times as many elderly would be below the poverty line , Mr. Butz said . 
The Census Bureau also said : 
-- Some 17.2 % of all money income received by families in 1988 went to the wealthiest 5 % of all families , up from 16.9 % in 1987 . 
That is the greatest share reported for any year since 1950 , although changing definitions over the years distort the comparison . 
-- The top fifth of all families got 44 % of the income , up from 41.5 % a decade earlier . 
The bottom fifth of all families got 4.6 % of the income , down from 5.2 % a decade earlier . 
-- Confirming other government data showing that wages are n't keeping pace with inflation , earnings of year-round , full-time male workers fell 1.3 % in 1988 after adjusting for higher prices , the first such drop since 1982 . 
Earnings of female workers were unchanged . 
-- Women working full-time earned 66 cents for every dollar earned by men , a penny more than in 1987 and seven cents more than in 1978 . 
-- Median household income -- which includes both those living in families and those who are n't -- rose 0.3 % last year to $ 27,225 after inflation . 
It rose sharply in the Northeast and Midwest and fell slightly in the South and West . 
Median family income was $ 32,191 , down 0.2 % . 
-- Per capita income of blacks , though still only 60 % that of whites , rose 3.9 % in 1988 , while per capita income of whites rose only 1.5 % . 
-- Among married couples , the gap between blacks and whites narrowed sharply , as income of black families shot up 6.8 % while income of whites did n't budge . 
Fueling a controversy that has been simmering for years , the Census Bureau also said its figures would look far rosier if it recalculated the poverty threshold using an improved consumer-price measure adopted in 1983 . 
The bureau said some 3.5 million fewer people would have fallen below the poverty line in 1988 -- and the poverty rate would have been 10.5 % instead of 13.1 % -- under the alternative calculation . 
Critics on the left and right have been calling for all sorts of revisions to the measure for years . 
A report by the staff of the Joint Economic Committee of Congress released yesterday concluded , `` It is misleading to make this change without adjusting for other changes . '' 
The official poverty threshold is set by the Office of Management and Budget . 
John E. Hayes Jr. was elected chairman , president and chief executive officer , succeeding David S. Black , who retired . 
Mr. Hayes , 52 years old , left Southwestern Bell Telephone Co. in January , where he had been chairman , president and chief executive , to join Triad Capital Partners , a St. Louis company with interests in solid waste and recycling , telecommunications and international venture capital . 
He has resigned his posts at Triad to take the Kansas Power positions . 
Kansas Power said Mr. Black , 61 , chose early retirement . 
The space shuttle Atlantis boosted the Galileo spacecraft on its way to Jupiter , giving a big lift as well to an ambitious U.S. program of space exploration . 
Seven years late in the launching , $ 1 billion over budget and a target of anti-nuclear protestors , Galileo has long been a symbol of trouble for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration . 
But yesterday , as Atlantis rumbled into a patch of clear sky above Florida with storm clouds closing in on it , NASA sought to turn Galileo into a symbol of triumph . 
`` NASA did it right ; that 's the message , '' said J.R. Thompson , the agency 's deputy administrator . 
The $ 1.4 billion robot spacecraft faces a six-year journey to explore Jupiter and its 16 known moons . 
If all goes well , it will parachute a probe into the dense Jovian atmosphere in July 1995 to pick up detailed data about gases that may be similar to the material from which the solar system was formed 4.6 billion years ago . 
Jupiter is so enormous -- its mass is 318 times that of Earth -- that its gravity may have trapped these primordial gases and never let them escape . 
Investigating Jupiter in detail may provide clues to what astronomer Tobias Owen calls the `` cosmic paradox '' of life : Jupiter and other bodies in the outer solar system are rich in elements such as hydrogen that are essential for life on Earth , but these planets are lifeless ; Earth , on the other hand , has a diminished store of such material but is rich in life . 
Some scientists have suggested that comets and asteroids may have brought enough of this kind of material from the outer solar system to Earth to spawn life . 
Beginning in December 1995 , Galileo will begin a two-year tour of the Jovian moons . 
In 1979 , two Voyager spacecraft sent back stunning photos of Jovian moons Io and Europa that showed them to be among the most intriguing bodies in the solar system . 
The photos showed active geysers on Io spewing sulfurous material 190 miles into its atmosphere and indicated that Europa may have an ocean hidden under a thick sheet of ice . 
Galileo 's photos of Europa will be more than 1,000 times as sharp as Voyager 's , according to Torrence Johnson , Galileo 's project scientist , and may show whether it actually has the only known ocean other than those on Earth . 
Atlantis lifted Galileo from the launch pad at 12:54 p.m. EDT and released the craft from its cargo bay about six hours later . 
`` Galileo is on its way to another world in the hands of the best flight controllers in this world , '' Atlantis Commander Donald Williams said . 
`` Fly safely . '' 
The five-member Atlantis crew will conduct several experiments , including growing plants and processing polymeric materials in space , before their scheduled landing at Edwards Air Force Base , Calif. , Monday . 
The Galileo project started in 1977 , and a number of project veterans were on hand to watch the launch . 
An ebullient Mr. Johnson , wearing a NASA baseball cap and carrying a camera and binoculars , called the launch `` fantastic . '' 
Benny Chin , manager of the Galileo probe , compared it to watching a child leave home . 
`` I 'm happy and sad , '' he said . 
Anti-nuclear activists took a less positive view . 
Having argued that Galileo 's plutonium power source could have released lethal doses of radiation if the shuttle exploded yesterday , they were n't quieted by yesterday 's successful launch . 
Galileo will skim past Earth in 1990 and 1992 , collecting energy from the planet 's gravitational field to gain momentum for its trip to Jupiter . 
The protesters point out that Galileo also could crash to Earth then . 
They said they dropped plans to infiltrate the Kennedy Space Center after NASA beefed up its security . 
One protest did get past NASA 's guard , though ; a computer virus caused anti-Galileo messages to flash onto some computer screens at NASA centers . 
The successful launch continues a remarkable recovery in the U.S. space-science program . 
An unmanned spacecraft , Magellan , already is heading to Venus and is due to begin mapping the planet next August . 
Voyager 2 sent back spectacular photos of Neptune and its moon , Triton , this summer . 
Next month , NASA plans to launch a satellite to study cosmic rays dating from the birth of the universe . 
In December , the shuttle Columbia will try to retrieve a satellite that 's been in orbit for nearly five years measuring the deleterious effects of space on materials and instruments . 
Next March , the shuttle Discovery will launch the Hubble space telescope , a $ 1.5 billion instrument designed to see the faintest galaxies in the universe . 
Not all of NASA 's space-science work will be so auspicious , though . 
Around Thanksgiving , the Solar Max satellite , which NASA repaired in orbit in 1984 , will tumble back into the Earth 's atmosphere . 
NASA wo n't attempt a rescue ; instead , it will try to predict whether any of the rubble will smash to the ground and where . 
The Associated Press 's earthquake coverage drew attention to a phenomenon that deserves some thought by public officials and other policy makers . 
Private relief agencies , such as the Salvation Army and Red Cross , mobilized almost instantly to help people , while the Washington bureaucracy `` took hours getting into gear . '' 
One news show we saw yesterday even displayed 25 federal officials meeting around a table . 
We recall that the mayor of Charleston complained bitterly about the federal bureaucracy 's response to Hurricane Hugo . 
The sense grows that modern public bureaucracies simply do n't perform their assigned functions well . 
Bally Manufacturing Corp. and New York developer Donald Trump have agreed in principle to a $ 6.5 million settlement of shareholder litigation stemming from Bally 's alleged greenmail payment to Mr. Trump . 
According to lawyers familiar with the settlement talks , the verbal agreement to end a lawsuit filed more than two years ago was reached last week and will soon be submitted to a federal judge in Camden , N.J . 
In February 1987 , Bally thwarted a possible hostile takeover bid from Mr. Trump by agreeing to buy 2.6 million of Mr. Trump 's 3.1 million Bally shares for $ 83.7 million -- more than $ 18 million above market price . 
The term greenmail refers to a situation where a company pays a premium over market value to repurchase a stake held by a potential acquirer . 
Lawyers for shareholders , Bally and Mr. Trump all declined to talk publicly about the proposed settlement , citing a request by a federal court magistrate not to reveal details of the agreement until it is completed . 
But some attorneys who are familiar with the matter said the $ 6.5 million payment will be shared by Bally and Mr. Trump , with the casino and hotel concern probably paying the bulk of the money . 
The amount Bally and Mr. Trump will pay to settle the class-action suit pales in comparison to the $ 45 million Walt Disney Co. and Saul Steinberg 's Reliance Group Holdings Inc. agreed to pay to settle a similar suit in July . 
That settlement represented the first time shareholders were granted a major payment in a greenmail case . 
Mr. Steinberg made a $ 59.7 million profit on the sale to Disney of his investment in the company in 1984 . 
But lawyers said Mr. Steinberg probably faced much more potential liability because , when he sued Disney during his takeover battle , he filed on behalf of all shareholders . 
When Disney offered to pay Mr. Steinberg a premium for his shares , the New York investor did n't demand the company also pay a premium to other shareholders . 
When Mr. Trump sued Bally , he sued only on behalf of himself . 
Mr. Trump and Bally also appeared to have some leverage in the case because in the state of Delaware , where Bally is incorporated , courts have held that greenmail is often protected by the business-judgment rule . 
That rule gives boards of directors wide latitude in deciding how to deal with dissident shareholders . 
SENATE HEARS final arguments in impeachment trial of federal judge . 
Yesterday , U.S. Judge Alcee Hastings faced his jury -- the full U.S. Senate -- and said , `` I am not guilty of having committed any crime . '' 
Seventeen articles of impeachment against the Florida judge , one of the few blacks on the U.S. bench , were approved by the House in August 1988 . 
The central charge against Judge Hastings is that he conspired with a Washington lawyer to obtain a $ 150,000 bribe from defendants in a criminal case before the judge , in return for leniency . 
He is also accused of lying under oath and of leaking information obtained from a wiretap he supervised . 
The Senate 's public gallery was packed with Judge Hastings ' supporters , who erupted into applause after he finished his argument . 
Judge Hastings , who was acquitted of similar charges by a federal jury in 1983 , claims he is being victimized and that the impeachment proceedings against him constitute double jeopardy . 
But Rep. John Bryant ( D. , Texas ) , the lead counsel for the House managers who conducted a lengthy inquiry into Judge Hastings ' activities , said `` a mountain of evidence points to his certain guilt . '' 
The Senate will deliberate behind closed doors today and is scheduled to vote on the impeachment tomorrow . 
If the judge is impeached , as is thought likely , he will be removed from office immediately . 
However , Judge Hastings has said he will continue to fight and is contemplating an appeal of any impeachment to the U.S. Supreme Court . 
COMPANIES SEEKING to make insurers pay for pollution cleanup win court victory . 
In a case involving Avondale Industries Inc. and its insurer , Travelers Cos. , the Second U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New York ruled in favor of the company on two issues that lawyers say are central to dozens of pollution cases around the country . 
Travelers and other insurers have maintained that cleanup costs are n't damages and thus are n't covered under commercial policies . 
They also have argued that government proceedings notifying a company of potential responsibility do n't fit the legal definition of a lawsuit ; thus , such governmental proceedings are n't covered by the policies , the insurers say . 
The appeals court disagreed on both counts . 
Avondale was notified by Louisiana officials in 1986 that it was potentially responsible for a cleanup at an oil-recycling plant . 
Avondale asked Travelers to defend it in the state proceeding , but the insurer did n't respond . 
The appeals court upheld a district judge 's ruling that the insurer had to defend the company in such proceedings . 
The appeals court also said , `` We think an ordinary businessman reading this policy would have believed himself covered for the demands and potential damage claims '' stemming from any cleanup . 
`` This decision will have a very considerable impact , '' said Kenneth Abraham , professor of environmental law and insurance law at the University of Virginia , because many commercial insurance policies are issued by companies based in New York . 
William Greaney , an attorney for the Chemical Manufacturers Association , said that while other appeals courts have ruled differently on whether cleanup costs are damages , the influence of the appeals court in New York `` will make insurers sit up and listen . '' 
He said the decision was the first in which a federal appeals court has ruled whether administrative government proceedings qualify as litigation . 
Barry R. Ostrager , an attorney for Travelers , said , `` there are procedural bases on which this case will be appealed further . '' 
NEW YORK 'S poor face nearly three million legal problems a year without legal help . 
That is the conclusion of a report released by the New York State Bar Association . 
The report was based on a telephone survey of 1,250 low-income households across the state , a mail survey of major legal-services programs and on-site interviews with individuals in the field . 
`` The report provides detailed documentation of the extent and nature of the problem and indicates how we may want to shape solutions , '' said Joseph Genova , chairman of the committee that oversaw the survey and a partner at the law firm of Milbank , Tweed , Hadley & McCloy . 
According to the study , slightly more than 34 % of those surveyed reported having at least one housing problem every year for which they had no legal help . 
Nearly 36 % ranked housing problems as their most serious unmet legal need . 
Other areas targeted by the survey 's respondents included difficulty obtaining or maintaining public benefits ( 22 % ) , consumer fraud ( 15.4 % ) , and health-care issues ( 15 % ) . 
During the 15-month survey , 43 % of all legal-services programs said that at some period they were unable to accept new clients unless they had an emergency . 
Mr. Genova said the committee may meet to propose solutions to the problems identified in the study . 
PROSECUTOR TO JOIN Gibson Dunn : 
Assistant U.S. Attorney Randy Mastro , who headed the government 's racketeering case against the International Brotherhood of Teamsters , will join Gibson , Dunn & Crutcher in its New York office . 
Mr. Mastro has been with the New York U.S. attorney 's office for nearly five years . 
In 1987 he became deputy chief of the civil division . 
Mr. Mastro will do civil litigation and white-collar defense work for Gibson Dunn , which is based in Los Angeles . 
FORMER APPLE COMPUTER Inc. general counsel John P. Karalis has joined the Phoenix , Ariz. , law firm of Brown & Bain . 
Mr. Karalis , 51 , will specialize in corporate law and international law at the 110-lawyer firm . 
Before joining Apple in 1986 , Mr. Karalis served as general counsel at Sperry Corp . 
After failing to find a buyer for the Sears Tower in Chicago , Sears , Roebuck & Co. is negotiating with Boston pension fund adviser Aldrich , Eastman & Waltch Inc. to refinance the property for close to $ 850 million , according to people close to the negotiations . 
Under the proposed agreement involving the world 's tallest building , Chicago-based Sears would receive about half the money through conventional mortgage financing and the other half as a convertible mortgage . 
At the end of the term of the convertible loan , Sears could still own half the building , and AEW could own the other half . 
Neither side would comment . 
The parties are currently negotiating over who would manage the building , which will be emptied of 6,000 employees from Sears ' merchandise group , which is moving elsewhere . 
The new manager will face the daunting task of leasing 1.8 million square feet in a relatively soft Chicago real estate market . 
Also , it has not yet been decided exactly how much of the mortgage AEW will be able to convert into equity . 
Convertible mortgages have become an increasingly popular way to finance prestigious buildings of late . 
In a convertible mortgage , the investor lends the building owner a certain amount in return for the option to convert its interest into equity , usually less than 50 % , at the end of the loan term . 
During the term , the lender can either receive a percentage of cash flow , a percentage of the building 's appreciation or a fixed return . 
The main advantage of a convertible mortgage is that it is not a sale and therefore does not trigger costly transfer taxes and reappraisal . 
Sears said it would put the 110-story tower on the block almost a year ago as part of its anti-takeover restructuring . 
But Japanese institutions shied away from bidding on the high-profile tower out of fear their purchase of the property would trigger anti-Japanese sentiment . 
Last summer , Sears appeared to have a deal with Canadian developer Olympia & York Developments Ltd . 
But that deal fell through in September after it became clear that the sale would lead to a major real estate tax reassessment , raising property taxes , and making it difficult to lease the building at competitive prices . 
Real estate industry executives said Sears ' investment banker , Goldman , Sachs & Co. , sought financing in Japan . 
However , Japanese authorities apparently were concerned that a refinancing also would attract too much publicity . 
Sears then went back to AEW , the Boston pension adviser that had proposed a convertible debt deal during the first round of bids last spring . 
AEW has $ 3.5 billion of real estate investments nationwide , according to a spokesman . 
Tandy Corp. said it signed a definitive agreement to acquire two units of Datatronic AB of Stockholm for cash . 
The amount was n't disclosed . 
The electronics maker and retailer previously estimated the sale price at between $ 100 million and $ 200 million for Datatronic 's Victor microcomputer and Micronic hand-held computer subsidiaries . 
In addition , Tandy will acquire rights to the Victor and Micronic names for computers . 
During 1988 , the Datatronic subsidiaries had combined sales in excess of $ 200 million . 
The transaction will give Tandy a well-known European computer brand that includes 2,700 dealers and distributors marketing to medium-sized business and educational institutions . 
Closing of the transaction is subject to certain conditions and regulatory approvals , the company said . 
Two rules in pending congressional legislation threaten to hinder leveraged buy-outs by raising the price tags of such deals by as much as 10 % . 
Wall Street is seething over the rules , which would curtail the tax deductibility of debt used in most LBOs . 
The provisions , in deficit-reduction bills recently passed by the House and Senate , could further cool the takeover boom that has been the driving force behind the bull market in stocks for much of the 1980s , some tax experts and investment bankers argue . 
Indeed , some investment bankers have already started restructuring deals to cope with the expected rules . 
Wall Street has all but conceded on the issue and is now lobbying for the less onerous Senate version of one of the provisions . 
At issue is the deductibility of certain junk bonds that are used in most LBOs . 
Such high-yield debt is similar to a zero-coupon bond in that it is sold at a discount to face value , with interest accruing instead of being paid to the holder . 
Under current rules , that accrued interest is deductible by the company issuing the debt . 
The House version of the legislation would kill that deduction , and label any such debt as equity , which is n't deductible . 
The less-rigorous Senate version would defer the deductibility for roughly five years . 
`` You see these in just about every LBO , '' said Robert Willens , senior vice president in charge of tax issues at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in New York . 
`` It becomes a source of cash '' for the company making the LBO because it gets a deduction and does n't have to repay the debt for several years . 
Typically , Mr. Willens estimates , this type of debt makes up 15 % to 20 % of the financing for LBOs . 
These types of bonds have been used in buy-outs of companies such as RJR Nabisco Inc. , Storer Communications Inc. and Kroger Co . 
A second provision passed by the Senate and House would eliminate a rule allowing companies that post losses resulting from LBO debt to receive refunds of taxes paid over the previous three years . 
For example , if a company posted a loss of $ 100 million from buy-out interest payments , the existing rule would allow the concern to be able to receive a refund from the tax it paid from 1986 through 1989 , when it may have been a profitable public company . 
But that rule is being virtually overlooked by Wall Street , which is concentrating on coping with the deduction issue . 
`` Prices for LBOs have to come down if you do n't have that feature , '' argued Lawrence Schloss , managing director for merchant banking at Donaldson , Lufkin & Jenrette Securities Corp. in New York . 
Several Wall Street officials say the proposed legislation already is having an impact . 
An investment group led by Chicago 's Pritzker family recently lowered a $ 3.35 billion bid for American Medical International , Beverly Hills , Calif. , because of the threat of the legislation . 
Moreover , one investment banker , who requested anonymity , said his firm did n't raise the ante for a target company earlier this month after a stronger bid emerged from a public company that was n't concerned about the financing provision . 
`` We would have paid more if we thought that law was n't going to pass , '' he said . 
One possible solution for Wall Street is to increase the equity part of the transaction -- that is , give lenders a bigger stake in the surviving company rather than just interest payments . 
That would force the buy-out firm and the target company 's management to reduce their level of ownership . 
`` The pigs in the trough may have to give a little bit of the slop back and then the deal can go through , '' said Peter C. Canellos , tax partner at Wachtell , Lipton , Rosen & Katz . 
Another solution , said a tax lawyer who requested anonymity , is for firms to use convertible bonds that sell at a discount . 
Since they have a lower interest rate , they would n't fall under the junk-bond category that would lose its deductibility . 
The House version of the bill would make debt non-deductible if it pays five percentage points above Treasury notes , has at least a five-year maturity and does n't pay interest for at least one year out of the first five . 
The bill would then declare that the debt is equity and therefore is n't deductible . 
The Senate bill would only deny the deduction until interest is actually paid . 
Currently , even though the issuer does n't pay tax , the debt holder is taxed on the accrued interest . 
But those holders are often foreign investors and tax-exempt pension funds that do n't pay taxes on their holdings . 
The Senate estimates that its version of the provision would yield $ 17 million the first year and a total of $ 409 million over five years . 
The House version would raise slightly more . 
Even if Wall Street finds ways around the new rules , a Senate aide contends LBOs will become somewhat more difficult . 
`` There 's no question it will make LBOs more expensive , '' he said . 
`` The interest deduction was the engine that made these things more productive . 
The average publicly offered commodity fund fell 4.2 % in September , largely because of the volatile markets in foreign currencies , according to Norwood Securities . 
The firm said that losers outnumbered gainers by more than three to one among the 122 funds it tracks . 
For the first nine months of the year , Norwood said the average fund has lost 3.3 % . 
The government moved aggressively to open the spigots of federal aid for victims of the California earthquake , but its reservoir of emergency funds must be replenished soon if the aid is to continue . 
President Bush signed a disaster declaration covering seven Northern California counties . 
The declaration immediately made the counties eligible for temporary housing , grants and low-cost loans to cover uninsured property losses . 
In addition , an unusually wide array of federal agencies moved to provide specialized assistance . 
The Department of Housing and Urban Development prepared to make as many as 100 vacant houses available for those left homeless , the Agriculture Department was set to divert food from the school-lunch program to earthquake victims , and the Pentagon was providing everything from radio communications to blood transfusions to military police for directing traffic . 
But the pool of federal emergency-relief funds already is running low because of the heavy costs of cleaning up Hurricane Hugo , and Congress will be under pressure to allocate more money quickly . 
In Hugo 's wake , Congress allocated $ 1.1 billion in relief funds , and White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said $ 273 million of that money remains and could be diverted for quick expenditures related to the earthquake . 
Now , though , enormous costs for earthquake relief will pile on top of outstanding costs for hurricane relief . 
`` That obviously means that we wo n't have enough for all of the emergencies that are now facing us , and we will have to consider appropriate requests for follow-on funding , '' Mr. Fitzwater said . 
The federal government is n't even attempting yet to estimate how much the earthquake will cost it . 
But Mr. Fitzwater said , `` There will be , I think quite obviously , a very large amount of money required from all levels of government . '' 
In Congress , lawmakers already are looking for ways to add relief funds . 
Money could be added to a pending spending bill covering the Federal Emergency Management Agency , which coordinates federal disaster relief . 
More likely , relief funds could be added to an omnibus spending bill that Congress is to begin considering next week . 
But it is n't just Washington 's relief dollars that are spread thin ; its relief manpower also is stretched . 
FEMA still has special disaster centers open to handle the aftermath of Hugo , and spokesman Russell Clanahan acknowledged that `` we 're pretty thin . '' 
Mr. Clanahan says FEMA now possibly may have the heaviest caseload in its history . 
To further complicate relief efforts , the privately funded American Red Cross also finds itself strapped for funds after its big Hugo operation . 
`` It 's been a bad month money-wise and every other way , '' said Sally Stewart , a spokeswoman for the Red Cross . 
`` It just makes it a little rough when you have to worry about the budget . '' 
The Red Cross has opened 30 shelters in the Bay area , serving 5,000 people . 
Twenty-five trucks capable of cooking food were dispatched from other states . 
All the precise types of federal aid that will be sent to California wo n't be determined until state officials make specific requests to FEMA , agency officials said . 
And in the confusion after the earthquake , `` the information flow is a little slow coming in from the affected area , '' said Carl Suchocki , a FEMA spokesman . 
Still , some aid is moving westward from Washington almost immediately . 
HUD officials said they will make available as many as 100 Bay area houses that are under HUD loans but now are vacant after the houses have been inspected to ensure they are sound . 
Additional housing vouchers and certificates will be made available , officials said , and some housing and community-development funds may be shifted from other programs or made available for emergency use . 
Another federal agency not normally associated with disaster relief -- the Internal Revenue Service -- moved quickly as well . 
The IRS said it will waive certain tax penalties for earthquake victims unable to meet return deadlines or make payments because of the quake 's devastation . 
The agency plans to announce specific relief procedures in the coming days . 
And the Treasury said residents of the San Francisco area will be able to cash in savings bonds even if they have n't held them for the minimum six-month period . 
One advantage that federal officials have in handling earthquake relief is the large number of military facilities in the San Francisco Bay area , facilities that provide a ready base of supplies and workers . 
Even before the full extent of the devastation was known , Defense Secretary Dick Cheney ordered the military services to set up an emergency command center in the Pentagon and prepare to respond to various FEMA requests for assistance . 
By yesterday afternoon , Air Force transport planes began moving additional rescue and medical supplies , physicians , communications equipment and FEMA personnel to California . 
A military jet flew a congressional delegation and senior Bush administration officials to survey the damage . 
And the Pentagon said dozens of additional crews and transport aircraft were on alert `` awaiting orders to move emergency supplies . '' 
Two Air Force facilities near Sacramento , and Travis Air Force Base , 50 miles northeast of San Francisco , were designated to serve as medical-airlift centers . 
Some victims also were treated at the Letterman Army Medical Center in San Francisco and at the Naval Hospital in Oakland . 
In addition , 20 military police from the Presidio , a military base in San Francisco , are assisting with traffic control , and a Navy ship was moved from a naval station at Treasure Island near the Bay Bridge to San Francisco to help fight fires . 
To help residents in Northern California rebuild , FEMA intends to set up 17 disaster assistance offices in the earthquake area in the next several days and to staff them with 400 to 500 workers from various agencies , said Robert Volland , chief of the agency 's individual assistance division . 
At these offices , earthquake victims will be helped in filling out a one-page form that they will need to qualify for such federal assistance as home-improvement loans and to repair houses . 
And federal officials are promising to move rapidly with federal highway aid to rebuild the area 's severely damaged road system . 
The Federal Highway Administration has an emergency relief program to help states and local governments repair federally funded highways and bridges seriously damaged by natural disasters . 
The account currently has $ 220 million . 
And though federal law dictates that only $ 100 million can be disbursed from that fund in any one state per disaster , administration officials expect Congress to move in to authorize spending more now in California . 
To get that money , states must go through an elaborate approval process , but officials expect red tape to be cut this time . 
Keith Mulrooney , special assistant to Federal Highway Administrator Thomas Larson , also said that after the 1971 San Fernando earthquake in Southern California , the state set tougher standards for bridges , and with federal aid , began a program to retrofit highways and bridges for earthquake hazards . 
The first phase of the program has been completed , but two other phases are continuing . 
The two major structures that failed Tuesday night , he said , were both built well before the 1971 earthquake -- the San Francisco Bay Bridge , completed in the 1930s , and the section of I-880 , built in the 1950s . 
The I-880 section had completed the first phase of the retrofitting . 
Laurie McGinley contributed to this article . 
FARMERS REAP abundant crops . 
But how much will shoppers benefit ? 
The harvest arrives in plenty after last year 's drought-ravaged effort : The government estimates corn output at 7.45 billion bushels , up 51 % from last fall . 
Soybean production swells 24 % . 
As a result , prices paid to farmers for the commodities , which are used in products as diverse as bubble gum and chicken feed , plummet 20 % to 33 % . 
But do n't expect too much in the way of price breaks soon at the supermarket . 
Economists expect consumer food prices to jump 5.5 % this year to the highest level since 1980 and up from last year 's 4.1 % rise . 
Next year may see a drop of one percentage point . 
Beef prices , hovering near records since the drought , could drop in earnest this winter if ranchers expand herds . 
Lower feed prices may help animals eat more cheaply , but humans have to factor in an expensive middleman : the processor . 
Food companies probably wo n't cut their prices much , blaming other costs . 
`` Labor takes the biggest single chunk out of the ` food dollar , ' '' says Frank Pankyo of the Food Institute . 
Stokely says stores revive specials like three cans of peas for 99 cents . 
Two cans cost 89 cents during the drought . 
IF IN VITRO fertilization works , it usually does so after only a few tries . 
Costly infertility problems and procedures proliferate as aging baby boomers and others decide to have children -- now . 
It 's estimated that one in six couples experiences infertility , and in 1987 , Americans spent about $ 1 billion to fight the problem . 
Only about five states now offer some form of insurance coverage , but more are expected . 
A letter in the New England Journal of Medicine notes that while technology offers `` almost endless hope ... when to stop has become a difficult question ... . '' 
The authors , from Boston 's Beth Israel Hospital , say that 84 % of the 50 births they followed occurred after only two in vitro cycles . 
It adds that births were `` extremely unlikely '' after the fourth cycle and concludes couples who do n't achieve a pregnancy after four to six procedures should be advised that success is unlikely . 
Some couples continue to try . 
`` Such determination may translate into extreme physical , emotional and financial costs , '' the letter warns . 
MARKET MOVES , these managers do n't . 
Only three of the 25 corporate pension fund managers attending a Lowry Consulting Group client conference say they plan to change the asset allocation mix in their portfolios because of the market drop . 
WORLD ODDITIES come alive in a multimedia version of the Guinness Book of Records . 
The $ 99 CD-ROM disk ( it can only be played on an Apple Macintosh computer at the moment ) combines animation , music and sound . 
Among the Guinness disk 's wonders : the world 's loudest recorded belch . 
ARTY FAX from David Hockney begins a tongue-in-cheek exhibit today at New York 's Andre Emmerich Gallery . 
One of the artist 's earliest Fax works was `` Little Stanley Sleeping , '' a portrait of his dog . 
PACS GIVE and receive in a debatable duet with employees ' favored charities . 
The Federal Election Commission clears corporate plans to donate to an employee 's chosen charity in exchange for the worker 's gift to the company political action committee . 
Latest approvals : Bell Atlantic 's New Jersey Bell and General Dynamics . 
Companies get more political clout plus a possible tax-deductible charitable donation -- so far no word from the IRS on deductibility . 
Detroit Edison , the plan pioneer , generated $ 54,000 in matching funds this year , up from $ 39,000 in 1988 . 
But the utility may not continue next year . 
`` We 're on a tight budget , '' says Detroit Edison 's Carol Roskind . 
Two election commission members opposed the matching plans . 
Scott E. Thomas says the plans give employees `` a bonus in the form of charitable donations made from an employer 's treasury '' in exchange for the political donation . 
`` The U.S. government could be , in effect , subsidizing political contributions to corporate PACs , '' he says . 
New Jersey Bell awaits state clearance . 
Despite federal approval , General Dynamics says it decided it wo n't go ahead with the matching program . 
CHRISTMAS SHOPPERS find a helping hand from some catalog companies . 
Blunt Ellis & Loewi estimates direct mail catalog sales rose to $ 12 billion last year . 
And while it 's too soon to tell how sales will fare in the important 1989 Christmas season , some companies take steps to ease the usual 11th-hour crush . 
Spiegel promises a `` Guaranteed Christmas , '' with a pledge to deliver goods before Christmas if ordered by Dec. 20 . 
And , for an extra $ 6 , Land 's End will deliver orders within two days ; customers can designate the day . 
Spiegel , which also owns Eddie Bauer and Honeybee , says that since 1987 , sales have doubled during the week before Christmas . 
An L.L. Bean spokeswoman notes : `` People are just used to living in a last-minute society . '' 
Blunt Ellis , a Milwaukee brokerage firm , says part of the reason catalog sales grow in popularity is because consumers have more money but less time to spend it . 
L.L. Bean hires about 2,700 workers for the season rush , about 300 more than last year ; Land 's End hires 2,000 . 
BRIEFS : 
Guarana Antarctica , a Brazilian soft drink , is brought to the U.S. by Amcap , Chevy Chase , Md . 
New Product News says the beverage `` looks like ginger ale , tastes a little like cherries and smells like bubble gum . '' ... 
`` Amenities '' planned for Chicago 's new Parkshore Tower apartments include an on-site investment counselor . 
Four years ago , Pittsburgh was designated the most-livable U.S. city by Rand McNally 's Places Rated Almanac , and the honor did wonders to improve Pittsburgh 's soot-stained image . 
`` People asked , is it really true ? '' says Maury Kelley , vice president , marketing services , for Beecham Products USA , a maker of health and personal-care products that used the ranking in its recruiting brochure . 
Yuba City , Calif. , meanwhile , ranked dead last among 329 metro areas . 
Unamused , residents burned Rand McNally books and wore T-shirts that said : `` Kiss my Atlas . '' 
The almanac will be making new friends and enemies on Oct. 27 , when an updated version will be released . 
Pittsburgh figures it will be dethroned but plans to accept its ouster graciously . 
The city 's Office of Promotion plans media events to welcome its successor . 
`` We 're encouraging a graceful transition , '' says Mary Kay Poppenberg , the organization 's president . 
`` Our attitude is that ( the ranking ) is like Miss America . 
Once you 're Miss America , you 're always Miss America . '' 
Tell that to Atlanta , which Pittsburgh replaced as the most-livable city in 1985 . 
Many Atlantans thought Pittsburgh was an unworthy heir . 
A columnist in the Atlanta Journal and Constitution wrote : `` Who did the research for this report ? 
Two guys from Gary , Ind. ? '' 
Not so . 
Co-authors David Savageau and Richard Boyer , live in Gloucester , Mass. , and Asheville , N.C. , respectively . 
`` Atlanta , '' Mr. Savageau sniffs , `` has unrealistic pretensions to world-class status . '' 
The new edition lists the top 10 metropolitan areas as Anaheim-Santa Ana , Calif. ; Boston ; Louisville , Ky. ; Nassau-Suffolk , N.Y. ; New York ; Pittsburgh ; San Diego ; San Francisco ; Seattle ; and Washington . 
Mr. Savageau says earthquake or not , San Francisco makes the list . 
But attention also rivets on who finishes last , and Pine Bluff , Ark. -- which finished third to last in 1981 and second to last in 1985 -- is certainly in the running . 
`` I hate to dignify the publication by commenting on the obscene rating , '' Mayor Carolyn Robinson says , adding that cities have no way to rebut the book . 
`` It 's like fighting your way out of a fog . 
You do n't know which way to punch . 
Northrop Corp. 's third-quarter net income fell 25 % to $ 21.5 million , or 46 cents a share , while General Dynamics Corp. reported nearly flat earnings of $ 76.5 million , or $ 1.83 a share . 
Los Angeles-based Northrop recorded an 8.2 % decline in sales as B-2 Stealth bomber research-and-development revenue continued to ebb and high costs on some other programs cut into profit . 
The aerospace concern earned $ 28.8 million , or 61 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales in the latest period were $ 1.25 billion , down from $ 1.36 billion in the 1988 quarter . 
At St. Louis-based General Dynamics , sales rose 10 % to $ 2.52 billion from $ 2.29 billion . 
It earned $ 76.4 million , or $ 1.82 a share , in the 1988 quarter . 
General Dynamics credited significant earnings gains in its general aviation and material service segments , an earnings recovery in submarine operations , and higher military aircraft sales . 
Northrop said sales fell because of the decline in B-2 development dollars from the government as the plane continues its initial production stage and because fewer F / A-18 fighter sections are being produced in its subcontract work with prime contractor McDonnell Douglas Corp . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Northrop shares closed at $ 21.125 , off 25 cents . 
General Dynamics closed at $ 54.875 , up 50 cents . 
Northrop , which since early 1988 has declined to accept fixed-price contracts for research and development , said earnings were hurt by excessive costs on a number of such contracts won years ago . 
Among them were the ALQ-135 electronic countermeasures system for the F-15 fighter . 
Northrop 's interest expense also soared to $ 35 million from $ 17 million a year ago . 
It said debt remained at the $ 1.22 billion that has prevailed since early 1989 , although that compared with $ 911 million at Sept. 30 , 1988 . 
The backlog of undelivered orders at Northrop on Sept. 30 was $ 4.68 billion , down from $ 5.16 billion a year earlier . 
For the nine months , Northrop reported a net loss of $ 46.9 million , or $ 1 a share , compared with profit of $ 190.3 million , or $ 4.05 a share , in 1988 . 
Sales dipped 3.6 % to $ 3.92 billion from $ 4.07 billion . 
At General Dynamics , factors reducing earnings in the military aircraft segment included higher levels of cost-sharing in development of the Advanced Tactical Fighter , and the high cost of an advanced version of the F-16 fighter . 
F-16 deliveries also have fallen `` slightly behind schedule , '' although a return to the previous schedule is expected in 1990 , the company said . 
Backlog at General Dynamics rose to $ 16.5 billion from $ 15.8 billion . 
Its interest expense surged to $ 21.5 million from $ 12.4 million . 
For the nine months , General Dynamics earned $ 210.3 million , or $ 5.03 a share , up marginally from $ 208.8 million , or $ 4.97 a share , on a 4.9 % rise in sales to $ 7.41 billion from $ 7.06 billion . 
Lotus Development Corp. reported a surprisingly strong 51 % increase in third-quarter net income on a 32 % sales gain , buoyed by strong demand for a new version of its 1-2-3 computer spreadsheet . 
The results topped analysts ' expectations and the earnings growth of competitors , prompting traders to all but forget the product-launch delays that bogged down the company for much of the past two years . 
Yesterday , in heavy , national over-the-counter trading , Lotus shares rose to $ 32.50 , up $ 1.25 apiece , capping a threemonth run-up of more than 40 % . 
Lotus said net rose to $ 23 million , or 54 cents a share , on sales of $ 153.9 million . 
A year ago , net was $ 14.3 million , or 31 cents a share , on sales of $ 116.8 million . 
For the nine months , net of $ 38.5 million , or 92 cents a share , trailed the year earlier 's $ 49.9 million , or $ 1.08 a share . 
Sales rose to $ 406 million from $ 356 million the year earlier . 
In the first half , Lotus struggled to keep market share with costly promotions while customers awaited the launch of 1-2-3 Release 3 , the upgraded spreadsheet software . 
Lotus 's results were about 10 % higher than analysts ' average expectations and compared favorably with the 36 % earnings rise reported a day earlier by rival Microsoft Corp. of Redmond , Wash . 
The company said results were bolstered by upgrades to Release 3 by previous customers and improved profit margins , the result of manufacturing-cost controls . 
Rick Sherlund , a Goldman Sachs analyst , said Lotus had upgrade revenue of about $ 22 million in the quarter , twice what he had expected . 
Also , he estimated unit shipments of 1-2-3 in all its forms were about 315,000 , up 7 % from 1988 's quarterly average . 
Demand for the new version was enabling Lotus to raise prices with distributors and to hold market share against Microsoft and other competitors that tried to exploit the earlier delays in Release 3 's launch , Mr. Sherlund added . 
He estimated that 1-2-3 outsold Microsoft 's Excel spreadsheet by four-to-one in the quarter , and held a 70 % or better share of the spreadsheet market . 
Silicon Valley heaved a sigh of relief yesterday . 
Though details were sketchy in the aftermath of the violent earthquake that shook the high-tech corridor along with the rest of the San Francisco Bay area , a spot check of computer makers turned up little , if any , potentially lingering damage to facilities or fabrication equipment . 
Analysts and corporate officials said they expected practically no long-term disruption in shipments from the Valley of either hardware or software goods . 
Intel Corp. , Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and National Semiconductor Corp. were all up and running yesterday , though many workers were forced to stay home because of damaged roadways ; others elected to take the day off . 
`` These systems are more rugged than many people would believe , '' said Thomas Kurlak , who tracks the computer industry for Merrill Lynch Research . 
`` It 's not the end of the world if you shake them up a little bit . '' 
Other companies , including International Business Machines Corp. and Hewlett-Packard Co. , completely idled their operations because of Tuesday evening 's temblor , which registered 6.9 on the Richter scale . 
Personnel spent the morning inspecting buildings for structural weaknesses , mopping up water from broken pipes and clearing ceiling tiles and other debris from factory floors . 
Still , many were confident that `` in a day or two , everything should be back to normal , '' according to a spokeswoman for the Semiconductor Industry Association , based in Cupertino . 
IBM , for instance , said it anticipates returning to a normal work schedule by the weekend at its San Jose plant , which puts out disk drives for the 3090 family of mainframes . 
A Hewlett-Packard spokeswoman said that , while `` things are a big mess , '' some 18,000 Valley employees have been called back to work today . 
Apple Computer added that it was being `` cautiously optimistic , '' despite not yet closely eyeballing all of its 50 buildings in the region . 
Even the carefully calibrated machinery in its giant Fremont plant , to the north of the Valley , was believed to be undamaged . 
Sun Microsystems Inc. and Tandem Computers Inc. also signaled that they should recover quickly . 
Digital Equipment Corp. , with major facilities in Santa Clara , Cupertino , Palo Alto and Mountain View , said that all of its engineering and manufacturing sites had reported to corporate headquarters in Maynard , Mass. , Tuesday night . 
None sustained `` significant '' damage , a spokesman said , adding that `` the delicate manufacturing process machines were checked and were all found to be operating normally . '' 
For many companies , of course , there is still a slew of nagging problems to grapple with , some of which have the potential to become quite serious . 
For example , a spokesman for Advanced Micro Devices said the Sunnyvale chip maker is worried about blackouts . 
A sudden surge or drop in electric power could ruin integrated circuits being built . 
But , given what might have happened to the fragile parts that are at the heart of the microelectronics business , the bulk of Valley companies seemed to be just about shouting hosannas . 
Several factors apparently spared the Valley -- a sprawling suburban stretch from San Jose to Palo Alto -- from the kind of impact felt in San Francisco , an hour 's drive north . 
For one thing , buildings there tend to be newer and , thus , in step with the latest safety codes . 
Also , the soil in the Valley is solid , unlike the landfill of San Francisco 's downtown Marina District , which was hit with fires and vast destruction . 
In addition , some microelectronics companies said they were prepared for tremulous conditions like Tuesday 's . 
Their machine tools are even bolted to the shop floor . 
Intel said that over the past decade , it has installed computer sensors and shutoff valves , sensitive to the shake of an earthquake , in the pipes that snake through its plants . 
Like other large Valley companies , Intel also noted that it has factories in several parts of the nation , so that a breakdown at one location should n't leave customers in a total pinch . 
That 's certainly good news for such companies as Compaq Computer Corp. , Houston , which has only a four-day supply of microprocessors from the Valley on hand because of a just-in-time manufacturing approach that limits the buildup of inventory . 
Compaq said it foresees no difficulties in obtaining parts in the immediate future . 
Computer makers were scrambling to help customers recover from the disaster . 
Digital Equipment has set up disaster-recovery response centers in Dallas , Atlanta and Colorado Springs , Colo . 
These units were handling calls both from people in the San Francisco area and from computers themselves , which are set to dial Digital automatically when trouble arises . 
They then run remotely controlled self-diagnostic programs . 
Digital also said it has dispatched teams of technicians to California . 
Meanwhile , several other major installations around the Valley -- America 's center of high-tech -- said they , too , fared as well as could be expected . 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , where the Energy Department tests and conducts research on nuclear weapons , had only `` superficial damage , '' a spokesman said . 
At Lockheed Corp. 's missiles and space systems group in Sunnyvale , about 40 miles south of San Francisco , workers were asked to head to work yesterday after it was realized that `` there were no show-stoppers '' in the 150-plus buildings on its one-square-mile campus . 
Several engineering and research offices needed closer scrutiny to make sure they were n't in danger of crumbling , but `` the bulk of the place is in pretty good shape , '' an official said . 
One of Lockheed 's most lucrative sectors -- accounting for more than half the aerospace company 's $ 10.59 billion in sales in 1988 -- the missiles and space group is the prime Pentagon contractor on the Trident II ballistic missile . 
It also generates pieces of the missile shield called the Strategic Defense Initiative . 
Fortunately , the Hubble Space Telescope -- set to be launched on the shuttle next year in a search for distant solar systems and light emitted 14 billion years ago from the farthest reaches of the universe -- was moved from Sunnyvale to the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at the beginning of October . 
John R. Wilke contribued to this article . 
Michael Maynard offered the world a faster way to break eggs . 
As thanks , the egg industry tried to break him . 
And the egg producers have done a pretty good job . 
They tried to put Mr. Maynard out of business by an act of Congress . 
Egg-industry lobbying helped persuade six states to ban Mr. Maynard 's automatic egg-breaking machine because of fears over salmonella . 
His company , Misa Manufacturing Inc. , was forced to seek protection from creditors under federal bankruptcy law in 1987 and has since been liquidated . 
Monthly sales of his Egg King machine -- which he now is marketing through a new company -- have sunk to about half a dozen from a peak of 75 , says the 46-year-old businessman . 
Mr. Maynard is n't the first entrepreneur to bump up against entrenched interests . 
But his case is notable both for the scale of the fight -- it is n't often that a congressional hearing is held to determine whether one small businessman is a threat to the republic -- and for what it tells about the pitfalls of marketing a new product . 
Now one might ask why people who sell eggs would fight someone who is trying to make it easier to crack them . 
Part of the answer lies in the nature of the industry . 
Many larger egg producers are also egg processors , who crack , inspect , and sanitize billions of eggs , turning them into powdered , liquified or frozen egg products . 
However , dozens of bakers , restaurant chefs and other food preparers who flocked to Mr. Maynard 's defense say that products ranging from egg bread to eclairs lose some zip when the eggs come in 30-pound cans instead of shells . 
But for companies that use hundreds of eggs a day , breaking them by hand can get , well , out of hand . 
The idea behind the Egg King is pretty simple : put the eggs into a cylinder that contains perforated baskets , spin them at a high speed to break the shells and strain the edible part through the baskets . 
One Egg King -- which at just under four feet tall and two feet wide has been likened to the robot R2-D2 -- can crack about 20,000 eggs an hour . 
Because fresh eggs are less expensive than processed ones , a big egg user can recover the Egg King 's $ 3,390 cost in a few months , says Mr. Maynard . 
Such centrifugal egg breakers have been around since the 1890s . 
But when Mr. Maynard came forward with his machine in the early 1970s nobody else was offering them in the U.S. . 
The main reason : salmonella . 
Chickens carry this bacteria , which can cause upset stomachs and , in rare cases , death among people . 
Hens sometimes pass salmonella to the eggs , and it can also be found on unclean shells . 
Thus , any machine that breaks large amounts of eggs at once has the potential to spread salmonella if a bad egg gets in with the good ones . 
Mr. Maynard claims this is a manageable problem . 
The Egg King carries written instructions to break only high-grade eggs that have been properly sanitized and , as an added precaution , to use the eggs only in products that will be cooked enough to kill bacteria . 
With nearly 4,000 machines in use , there have been no salmonella problems as long as instructions were followed , Mr. Maynard boasts . 
He says the handful of salmonella cases involving products that may have used eggs broken by an Egg King stemmed from a failure to adequately cook the products . 
But he says that 's no more a reason for banning Egg Kings than bad drivers are a reason for banning cars . 
Opponents do n't buy such arguments . 
`` Human nature being what it is , people do n't always follow instructions , '' says Jack Guzewich , chief of food protection for the New York state Health Department . 
Leading the assault against the Egg King has been United Egg Producers . 
The Decatur , Ga. , trade group has issued a `` briefing book '' that claims the machine is `` a health hazard '' and that Mr. Maynard is trying `` to make a fast buck at the expense of the nation 's egg producers . '' 
The UEP declines to comment , but the group 's attorney , Alfred Frawley , says the group 's actions are motivated solely by `` health concerns . '' 
An early battleground was the U.S. Department of Agriculture . 
Mr. Maynard initially won approval for his machine to be used at egg-processing facilities regulated by the USDA 's Food Safety Inspection Service . 
Unfortunately for Mr. Maynard , another branch of the USDA , the Agricultural Marketing Service , was in charge of eggs . 
After receiving complaints from egg producers , this branch got the other branch to rescind its approval , thus limiting the machine 's potential market to bakeries and restaurants and other establishments that are n't regulated by the USDA . 
The egg producers also lobbied the Food and Drug Administration . 
But the FDA in a 1985 letter to the United Egg Producers said that there was `` little likelihood '' of a health problem as long as instructions were followed . 
So the producers went to Capitol Hill , where a congressman from Georgia introduced a measure to ban centrifugal egg-breaking machines . 
Mr. Maynard , whose company at the time was based in Santa Ana , Calif. , enlisted his local congressman , and the battle was joined . 
Mr. Maynard 's forces finally defeated the measure , though it took a vote on the floor of the House of Representatives to do it . 
Even then , opponents managed to get a congressional hearing to examine what one congressman called an `` unscrupulous '' method for breaking eggs . 
Foiled in their effort to get a national ban , the egg producers turned their attention to the states . 
So far , New York , New Jersey , Nebraska , Georgia , Michigan and Minnesota have outlawed Mr. Maynard 's device , citing health concerns . 
An antitrust suit that Mr. Maynard 's company filed in Los Angeles federal court against the United Egg Producers and others only added to the entrepreneur 's woes . 
The judge dismissed the suit and ordered Mr. Maynard 's company to pay over $ 100,000 in legal fees to the defendants ' lawyers . 
Mr. Maynard says the ruling pushed his company into bankruptcy court . 
Now he has moved to Oklahoma where costs are lower , and started a new company , Adsi Inc. , to market his machine . 
But , so far , the change of scenery has n't ended his string of bad breaks . 
Mr. Maynard recently fell from a horse and fractured his arm . 
Michelle Pfeiffer ca n't chew gum and sing at the same time . 
But on the evidence of `` The Fabulous Baker Boys , '' that may be the only thing she ca n't do , at least when she 's acting in movies . 
As the tough , slinky lounge chanteuse in `` The Fabulous Baker Boys , '' Ms. Pfeiffer sings for herself , and more than passably well . 
Her Susie Diamond handles a song the way the greats do , like she 's hearing the way it should sound inside her head and she 's concentrating on matching that internal tone . 
Yet her intensity stops and starts with the music . 
When she is n't performing for an audience , she prepares for a song by removing the wad of gum from her mouth , and indicates that she 's finished by sticking the gum back in . 
Like almost everything in this wonderfully romantic and edgy movie , Ms. Pfeiffer 's Susie seems like someone you 've seen before , in numerous show-biz stories ( even her name , Susie Diamond , sounds like a character Marilyn Monroe must have played ) . 
Yet nothing about `` Baker Boys , '' and certainly nothing about Ms. Pfeiffer , really is like something from the video vault . 
Steve Kloves , the young writer and director ( he is n't yet 30 ) , has only one produced picture to his credit ; he wrote the screenplay for `` Racing With the Moon , '' a lovely coming-of-age picture set in the '40s . 
Both movies are infused with the nostalgic sensibility of someone much older , someone who does n't dismiss dreams , but who also has enough experience to see his limits . 
However , Mr. Kloves directs his own material without sentimentality and at its own eccentric pace ; `` Baker Boys '' is both bluesy and funny . 
He 's put a fresh spin on material that could come off terribly cliched ; for example , the way Susie wows an audience the first time she sings with the Baker Boys . 
Of course , it does n't hurt that Mr. Kloves has made up for his lack of experience behind the camera with technicians who know exactly what they 're doing . 
Much of the picture 's sensuality emerges from cinematographer Michael Ballhaus 's slyly seductive lens work . 
After working for years with Werner Rainer Fassbinder , the late German director , and more recently with Martin Scorsese ( `` After Hours , '' `` The Color of Money , '' `` The Last Temptation of Christ '' ) , Mr. Ballhaus has developed a distinctively fluid style . 
And Dave Grusin 's witty score embraces the banal requirements of banquet-hall musicianship ( `` Feelings '' is a must ) without condescension . 
Though Ms. Pfeiffer has the flashy part -- she gets the best comic bits and to wear glamorous dresses and spiked heels the boys are pretty great , too . 
What seemed like a good idea , to cast the Bridges brothers ( Jeff and Beau ) as the Baker brothers , actually turned out to be a good idea . 
Anyone who 's tried to appear `` natural '' in front of a camera knows that it 's much more natural to end up looking like a stiff . 
So it 's quite possible that the terrific play between the brothers is n't natural at all , that Jeff and Beau had to work like crazy to make their brotherly love -- and resentment and frustration and rage -- seem so very real . 
When the movie opens the Baker brothers are doing what they 've done for 15 years professionally , and twice as long as that for themselves : They 're playing proficient piano , face-to-face , on twin pianos . 
They 're small time in the small time-hotels ( not the best ones ) and restaurants in Seattle . 
Yet they do n't disparage their audiences by disparaging their act . 
They wear tuxedos most nights , unless circumstances ( a regular gig at a `` tropical '' lounge , for example ) require them to wear special costumes , like Hawaiian shirts . 
Plump Beau , looking eager to please with his arched eyebrows and round face , plays the older brother , Frank . 
Frank plans the program , takes care of business , and approaches the work like any other job . 
He 's even able to think of a job that takes him out of the house 300 nights a week as an ordinary job . 
He 's got a wife and two kids and a house in the suburbs ; the audience sees only the house , and only near the end of the movie . 
Frank grovels a little for the bookers , probably no more or less than he would have to if he worked for a big corporation . 
On his off-hours he wears cardigan sweaters . 
Jeff Bridges is the younger brother , Jack , who fancies himself the rebellious artist ; he lives in a loft with his sick dog and the occasional visit from the little girl upstairs , who climbs down the fire escape . 
Yet Jack 's the one who can remember every dive they ever played , and when , and he dutifully shows up for work night after night ( he consoles himself with booze and by showing up at the last minute ) . 
Looking leaner than he has in a while , the younger Mr. Bridges 's Jack is sexy and cynical and a far sadder case than Frank , who 's managed to chisel his dreams to fit reality without feeling too cheated . 
He can live with little pleasures . 
Mr. Kloves has put together some priceless moments . 
These include Jennifer Tilly 's audition to be the Baker Boys ' girl singer . 
Ms. Tilly of the tweety-bird voice showed great comic promise during her stint as the mobster 's girlfriend on the television show , `` Hill Street Blues . '' 
Here she delivers , especially during her enthusiastically awful rendition of the `` Candy Man , '' which she sings while prancing around in a little cotton candy pink angora sweater that could n't be more perfect . 
( It matches her voice . ) 
And Ms. Pfeiffer 's particular version of `` Making Whoopee '' -- and the way Mr. Ballhaus photographs her , from the tips of her red high heels right up her clingy red velvet dress -- might make you think of Marilyn Monroe if Ms. Pfeiffer had n't gone and become a star in her own right . 
VIDEO TIP : 
If you 'd like to see the first time Michelle Pfeiffer sang on screen , and you have a lot of patience , take a look at `` Grease 2 . '' 
You 'll find her there . 
Better yet , check out the emergence of her comic persona in `` Married to the Mob , '' Jonathan Demme 's delightful Mafia comedy . 
International Proteins Corp. definitively agreed to pay $ 49 million and 2,850,000 of its shares for Hanson PLC 's Ground Round restaurant subsidiary . 
Shareholders of International Proteins , a food and agriproducts company , will vote on the transaction at a meeting late next month . 
Hanson is a London producer of consumer and other goods . 
International Proteins shares did n't trade yesterday on the American Stock Exchange . 
They closed Tuesday in composite trading at $ 13.625 , down 37.5 cents , giving the stock portion of the transaction an indicated value of $ 38.8 million . 
Control Data Corp. agreed to sell its idle supercomputer manufacturing plant here to Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co. for $ 5.8 million . 
The tentative agreement calls for 3M to use the 115,000-square-foot plant and 19 acres of land for research laboratories . 
Control Data has been seeking a buyer for the facility since it folded its ETA Systems Inc. supercomputer unit this past April . 
General Dynamics Corp. was awarded contracts totaling $ 589 million for one Navy Trident submarine and for Air Force research on the National Aerospace plane . 
Grumman Corp. won a $ 58.9 million Navy contract for 12 F-14 aircraft . 
Raytheon Co. was issued a $ 19.2 million Air Force contract for support of the Milstar communications satellite . 
McDonnell Douglas Corp. got a $ 12.5 million Air Force contract for support work on the National Aerospace plane . 
Denis C. Smith was named to the new post of vice president of world-wide advanced materials operations for this chemicals concern . 
Mr. Smith , 50 years old , was formerly responsible for advanced materials , which include plastic composites and alloys , in North America only . 
Himont is 81%-owned by Montedison S.p . A. of Milan , Italy . 
Galveston-Houston Co. said it will redeem all 3,950 shares of its privately held 6.5 % convertible Series C preferred stock Nov. 8 . 
Holders can either convert each share into 421 shares of the company 's common stock , or surrender their shares at the per-share price of $ 1,000 , plus accumulated dividends of $ 6.71 a share . 
Galveston-Houston makes and markets products for the construction , mining and energy industries . 
Bank Building & Equipment Corp. of America , which previously said accounting discrepancies its auditors uncovered would hurt earnings and require restatement of earlier results , increased its projections of the negative fiscal impact , and said it was exploring the company 's sale . 
Bank Building , which builds and equips banks , had announced it would restate the first-three quarters of this fiscal year , which ends Oct. 31 . 
On Oct. 5 , the company estimated after-tax effects on the year 's earnings would be `` at least '' $ 1.3 million . 
Yesterday , the company said the negative after-tax effect on earnings for the year will be about $ 3.3 million . 
For the nine months ended July 31 , Bank Building had a net loss of $ 1 million , on revenue of $ 66.5 million . 
Bank Building , which expects to report a fourth-quarter loss , said it engaged advisers to `` explore financial alternatives for the company including the possible sale of the company or one or more of its units . '' 
Company auditors are continuing their review , and final restated figures are n't yet available . 
Bank Building earlier said the restatement is necessitated by `` certain errors in recording receivables and payables '' at its Loughman Cabinet division . 
That division 's manager has been fired . 
In American Stock Exchange composite trading , Bank Building closed at $ 4 a share , down 62.5 cents . 
Gen. Paul X. Kelley , retired commandant of the U.S. Marine Corps , was elected a director of this plastics , specialty materials and aerospace concern , succeeding Jewel Lafontant , who resigned to accept a government position . 
Rep. Mary Rose Oakar ( D. , Ohio ) at last week 's hearings on irregularities in programs at the Department of Housing and Urban Development : 
I do n't want to feel guilty representing my constituents . 
And if I think that some people { on HUD Secretary Jack Kemp 's } staff are off base in terms in which they 're evaluating certain things affecting my hometown , I have to tell you something -- I 'm not going to take it . 
I think that I 'm elected to represent the people that sent me here . 
And one of our charges is to be an ombudsman for our area . 
And if we 're not ombudsman for our area , we ought to be thrown out of office . 
On the other hand , if we 're asking for something unreasonable or unethical and so on , then that 's a whole different story . 
But if I feel that there are situations where I 'm trying to get housing for our area -- whatever it happens to be -- and I have to feel that I ca n't even ask a question , I 've got to tell you , I think that 's outrageous . . 
I think these regulations that would prohibit well-operated programs in areas across this country would be wrong to change ... . 
I do n't want to see some guidelines change that 's going to inhibit my city 's opportunity to use its money . 
The Chicago Mercantile Exchange said it fined Capcom Futures Inc. $ 500,000 and accepted its withdrawal from membership as part of a settlement of disciplinary actions against the firm . 
Capcom Futures is a Chicago subsidiary of Capcom Financial Services Ltd. , a London financial firm that was implicated last year in a scheme to launder drug money . 
The case is pending . 
The firm was indicted in Tampa , Fla. , on money-laundering charges . 
In June , the Chicago Board of Trade said it suspended Capcom Financial . 
The Capcom Futures unit withdrew from Board of Trade membership voluntarily in August , a Board of Trade spokesman said . 
Capcom Futures , while neither admitting nor denying the Merc charges , said in a statement that the Merc charges were `` technical in nature '' and that `` no customers were hurt '' as a result of the violations cited by the Merc . 
The Merc alleged that , among other things , from April 1987 through October 1988 Capcom Futures failed to document trades between Capcom Futures and people or entities directly or indirectly controlled by Capcom Futures shareholders . 
Frederick W. Lang , 65 years old , the founder of this software services concern , was elected to the new post of chairman . 
Formerly president and treasurer , Mr. Lang remains chief executive officer . 
Victor C. Benda , 58 , formerly executive vice president , succeeds Mr. Lang as president and becomes chief operating officer , a new post . 
Maurice Warren , 56-year-old group managing director , was named chief executive officer of this food and agriculture group . 
The post of chief executive has been vacant since July when Terry Pryce , 55 , left the company . 
Money-market mutual fund assets grew at nearly three times their usual rate in the latest week , as investors opted for safety instead of the stock market . 
Money-fund assets soared $ 4.5 billion in the week ended Tuesday , to a record $ 348.4 billion , according to IBC / Donoghue 's Money Fund Report , a Holliston , Mass.-based newsletter . 
`` We were expecting it , following the fall of the Dow Friday , '' said Brenda Malizia Negus , editor of Money Fund Report . 
`` It 's the proverbial flight to safety . '' 
Despite recent declines in interest rates , money funds continue to offer better yields than other comparable investments . 
The average seven-day compound yield on the 400 taxable funds tracked by IBC / Donoghue 's was 8.55 % in the latest week , down from 8.60 % . 
Compound yields assume reinvestment of dividends and that current yields continue for a year . 
Most short-term certificates of deposit are yielding about 8 % or less at major banks , and the yields on Treasury bills sold at Monday 's auction fell to 7.61 % for three months and 7.82 % for six months . 
Money-fund assets have been rising at an average rate of $ 1.6 billion a week in recent months , Ms. Negus said , reflecting the relatively high yields . 
In the latest week , funds open to institutions alone grew by $ 1.8 billion . 
Some fund managers say inflows could increase in coming days as a result of stock selling in the wake of Friday 's 190.58 point drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average . 
`` If you 're selling equities , you do n't start getting proceeds for five to seven days , '' said Frank Rachwalski , who manages the Kemper Money Market Fund . 
Neal Litvack , marketing vice president for Fidelity Investments , said inflows Friday into Fidelity 's Spartan and Cash Reserves money-market funds were about twice normal levels , with about half coming from equity and junk-bond funds . 
Monday and Tuesday `` were lackluster in comparison , '' he said . 
`` People are n't necessarily running scared , '' Mr. Litvack said . 
`` They 're maintaining their attitude toward investing , which has leaned toward the conservative recently . '' 
Money-fund yields tend to lag interestrate trends as portfolio managers adjust the maturities of their investments -- short-term Treasury securities , commercial paper and the like -- to capture the highest yields . 
Maturities usually are shorter when rates are rising and longer when they are falling . 
The average maturity of the funds tracked by IBC / Donoghue 's remained at 38 days for the third consecutive week . 
It was as short as 29 days at the start of this year , when rates were marching steadily upward , and hit 42 days in August . 
The average seven-day simple yield of the funds fell to 8.21 % this week from 8.26 % . 
The average 30-day simple yield was 8.26 % , compared with 8.27 % the week before , and the 30-day compound yield slid to 8.60 % from 8.61 % . 
Some funds are posting yields far higher than the average . 
The highest yielding taxable fund this week was Harbor Money Market Fund , with a seven-day compound yield of 12.75 % . 
That included capital gains that were passed along to customers . 
Among the other high-yielding funds , Fidelity 's Spartan Fund had a seven-day compound yield of 9.33 % in the latest week . 
The seven-day compound yield of the Dreyfus Worldwide Dollar Fund was 9.51 % . 
whose Della Femina McNamee WCRS agency created liar Joe Isuzu , among others -- announced a massive restructuring that largely removes it from the advertising business and includes selling the majority of its advertising unit to Paris-based Eurocom . 
The complex restructuring , which was long expected , transforms London-based WCRS from primarily a creator of advertising into one of Europe 's largest buyers of advertising time and space . 
It also creates a newly merged world-wide ad agency controlled by Eurocom and headed jointly by New York ad man Jerry Della Femina and two top WCRS executives . 
The merged agency 's admittedly ambitious goal : to become one of the world 's 10 largest agencies , while attracting more multinational clients than the agencies were able to attract alone . 
WCRS 's restructuring reflects the growing importance of media buying in Europe , where the only way to get a good price on advertising time and space is to buy it in bulk . 
For Eurocom , meanwhile , the move gives it a strong U.S. foothold in Della Femina , and more than quadruples the size of its ad agency business world-wide . 
It also gives the outspoken Mr. Della Femina -- who often generates as much publicity for himself as for his clients -- an international platform that he most certainly wo n't be loath to use . 
According to terms , WCRS will pay 2.02 billion French francs ( $ 318.6 million ) for the 50 % it does n't already own of Carat Holding S.A. , one of Europe 's largest media buyers . 
Meanwhile , Eurocom , which had held 20 % of WCRS 's ad unit , will pay # 43.5 million ( $ 68.5 million ) to raise its stake to 60 % . 
That price also covers Eurocom raising to 60 % its 51 % stake in Europe 's Belier Group , a joint venture ad agency network it owns with WCRS . 
Eurocom will also have the right to buy the remaining 40 % of the merged ad agency group in six years . 
The transaction places the three executives squarely at the helm of a major agency with the rather unwieldy name of Eurocom WCRS Della Femina Ball Ltd. , or EWDB . 
The merged agency will include Della Femina McNamee based in New York , Eurocom 's various agencies in France , the Belier Group in Europe and WCRS 's other advertising and direct marketing operations . 
Mr. Della Femina will be joint chairman with former WCRS executive Robin Wight . 
Both will report to Tim Breene , a former WCRS executive who will be chief executive officer at the new agency . 
In an interview in New York , Mr. Breene , fresh from a Concorde flight from Paris where executives had worked through most of the night , outlined big plans for the new agency . 
`` Our goal is to develop quite rapidly to a top-10 position ... by the end of three years from now . 
It implies very dramatic growth , '' he said . 
He added that Eurocom and WCRS had agreed to provide a development fund of # 100 million for acquisitions . 
The new agency group is already in discussions about a possible purchase in Spain , while Mr. Breene said it also plans to make acquisitions in Scandinavia , Germany and elsewhere . 
Cracking the top 10 within three years will be difficult at best . 
Della Femina had billings of just $ 660 million last year and ranked as the U.S. 's 24th-largest ad agency . 
The merged company that it now becomes part of will have billings of just more than $ 2.6 billion -- most of that in Europe -- bringing it to about 14th world-wide . 
To make it to top-10 status , it would have to leapfrog over such formidable forces as Grey Advertising , D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles and Omnicom 's DDB Needham . 
The merged agency 's game plan to attract multinational packaged-goods advertisers may prove equally difficult . 
When WCRS created Della Femina McNamee out of the merger of three smaller agency units in 1988 , it said it did so in order to attract larger clients , especially packaged-goods companies . 
Since then , Della Femina won Pan Am as an international client and also does work for a few packaged-goods clients , including Dow Chemical Co. 's Saran Wrap . 
But major packaged-goods players of the world -- such as Procter & Gamble , Colgate-Palmolive and Unilever -- have steadfastly eluded the agency . 
`` Three of our favorite names , '' Mr. Della Femina calls that roster , adding hopefully , `` We 're a much more attractive agency to large multinationals today than we were yesterday . '' 
Still , the restructuring could create one of the most powerful alliances between advertising and media-buying firms that Europe has seen . 
As part of the restructuring , WCRS and Eurocom said they will look for ways to combine their media buying across Europe . 
What 's more , both Eurocom and brothers Francis and Gilbert Gross , who founded Carat , will acquire 14.99 % stakes in WCRS Group , creating a powerful link between Eurocom and Carat . 
Carat will receive its WCRS stake as part of payment for the 50 % Carat stake that WCRS is buying , while Eurocom said it expects to pay about # 32 million for its WCRS stake . 
Mr. Della Femina says he plans to remain heavily involved in the creative product at the world-wide agency , serving as a sort of `` creative conscience . '' 
Louise McNamee , Della Femina 's president , will continue running the U.S. agency day-to-day . 
They and other top executives signed long-term employment contracts and Mr. Della Femina will receive an additional multimillion-dollar sum , which some industry executives pegged at about $ 10 million . 
WCRS Group , for its part , will now be able to follow its longstanding plan of becoming `` a holding company for a series of media-related businesses , '' said Peter Scott , the firm 's chief executive . 
In addition to Carat , WCRS will hold onto its public relations , TV programming and other businesses . 
WCRS says its debt will be cut to # 24 million from # 66 million as a result of the transaction . 
For Carat , meanwhile , the alliance with Eurocom and WCRS is intended to strengthen its own push outside France . 
Carat 's Gross brothers invented the idea of large-scale buying of media space . 
By buying the space in bulk , they obtain discounts as high as 50 % , which they can pass on to customers . 
They thus have won the French space-buying business of such advertising giants as Coca-Cola Co. , Fiat S.p . A. , Gillette and Kodak . 
But now , other agencies are getting into the business with their own competing media-buying groups -- and Carat wants to expand to the rest of Europe . 
To help finance the Carat purchase , WCRS said it plans an issue of Euroconvertible preferred shares once the market settles down . 
But WCRS added that `` in the light of the current uncertainty in the equity markets , '' it has arranged medium-term debt financing , which would be underwritten by Samuel Montagu & Co. Ltd . 
Earthquake 's Damage 
Tuesday 's earthquake brought the San Francisco ad scene to a screeching halt yesterday , with only a few staffers showing up at their offices , mainly to survey the damage or to wring their hands about imminent new-business presentations . 
While no agencies reported injuries to employees , the quake damaged the offices of J. Walter Thompson , Chiat / Day / Mojo and DDB Needham , among others , spokesmen for those agencies said . 
Staffers at Thompson , whose offices are in the ultramodern Embarcadero Center , watched pictures drop from the walls and then felt the skyscraper sway seven to eight feet , according to a spokeswoman . 
Plaster fell and windows were broken at Chiat / Day / Mojo , a spokesman for that agency said . 
Late yesterday afternoon , DDB Needham executives were scrambling to figure out what to do about a new business presentation that had been scheduled for today , a spokesman said . 
DDB Needham 's office building may have sustained structural damage , the spokesman added . 
`` All operations have stopped , '' he said . 
A number of agencies , including Thompson and Foote , Cone & Belding , said some employees who live outside of San Francisco , fearful that they would n't be able to get home , spent the night at the agency . 
Ad Notes ... . 
NEW ACCOUNT : 
Chesebrough-Pond 's Inc. , Greenwich , Conn. , awarded its Faberge hair care accounts to J. Walter Thompson , New York . 
Thompson , a unit of WPP Group , will handle Faberge Organic shampoo and conditioner and Aqua Net hairspray . 
The accounts , which billed about $ 7 million last year , according to Leading National Advertisers , were previously handled at Bozell , New York . 
WHO 'S NEWS : 
William Morrissey , 44 , was named executive vice president , world-wide director of McCann Direct , the direct marketing unit of Interpublic Group 's McCann-Erickson agency . 
He had been president and chief operating officer of Ogilvy & Mather Direct . 
BOZELL : 
Los Angeles will be the site of a new entertainment division for the ad agency . 
The division will be headed by Dick Porter , who returns to Bozell after being vice president of media at MGM . 
AC&R ADVERTISING : 
The agency 's three California offices , previously called AC&R / CCL Advertising , will now be called AC&R Advertising to match the name of its New York office . 
AC&R Advertising is a unit of Saatchi & Saatchi Co . 
NEW BEER : 
Sibra Products Inc. , Greenwich , Conn. , awarded its Cardinal Amber Light beer account to Heidelberg & Associates , New York . 
Budget is set at $ 1.5 million . 
The new beer , introduced this week at a liquor industry convention , is imported from Switzerland 's Cardinal brewery . 
Heidelberg 's first ads for the brand , which Sibra says will compete with imported light beer leader Amstel Light , feature the line `` The best tasting light beer you 've ever seen . 
Diamond-Star Motors Corp. , a joint venture of Chrysler Corp. and Mitsubishi Motors Corp. said it will begin shipping Mitsubishi Eclipse cars to Japan next week , emulating other Japanese auto ventures shipping U.S.-built vehicles back to Japan . 
Diamond-Star said it will export about 1,500 Eclipse cars to Japan by year 's end . 
Honda Motor Co. , the first Japanese auto maker to ship cars to Japan from the U.S. , is now exporting more than 5,000 Accord Coupes a year from its Marysville , Ohio , factory . 
One of the most remarkable features of the forced marches of the ethnic Turks out of Bulgaria over the past five months has been the lack of international attention . 
The deportation of more than 315,000 men , women and children by the Bulgarian regime adds up to one of the largest migrations seen in the postwar years . 
Yet some people are advancing a chilling casuistry : that what we are seeing is somehow the understandable result of the historical sins committed by the Turks in the 16th century . 
Today 's Turks in Bulgaria , in other words , deserve what is coming to them four centuries later . 
As if this were n't enough , the Senate Judiciary Committee is getting into the act . 
On Tuesday it approved Senator Bob Dole 's proposed commemorative resolution designating April 24 , 1990 , as the `` National Day of Remembrance of the 75th Anniversary of the Armenian Genocide of 1915-1923 , '' suffered at the hands of the warring Ottoman Empire . 
There can be no quibbling that the Armenians endured terrible suffering , but one has to wonder what possible good such a resolution will achieve . 
It puts great strain on a longstanding U.S. friendship with Turkey , a country that has been one of America 's strongest allies in NATO . 
The resolution also comes at a time when Turkey has been seeking help from the United States in resolving its Bulgarian emigration controversy and pursuing democratic reforms that may lead to membership in the European Community . 
Turkey has been fighting its past for years , and thus far has been only partially successful . 
Must it now accept that one of its strongest allies blames it for the genocide of another people ? 
Such sentiment only encourages the adverse feelings toward Turkey that surfaced when Turkey asked for assistance in dealing with its Bulgarian emigration crisis . 
Mr. Dole 's odd effort notwithstanding , most of Turkey 's political problems lie with the Europeans . 
Part of the problem some Europeans have with Turkey seems to stem from its location -- Turkey is n't really part of Europe . 
Why , they wonder , should it belong to the EC ? 
Another anti-Turkish hook is the Islamic faith of the majority of the Turkish people : Turkey , we are told , is not a Christian nation ; its people simply wo n't fit in with the Western European Judeo-Christian tradition . 
It 's when these rationalizations fall on deaf ears that the old standby of retribution for treatment at the hands of the Ottoman Empire comes to the fore . 
No one has to accept the sins of the Ottoman Empire to reject that argument . 
Turkey in any event is long past it . 
The country has in recent years accepted more than 500,000 refugees from at least four bordering nations . 
Kurds , suffering what many people consider to be a current extermination campaign at the hands of Syria , Iran and Iraq have inundated eastern Turkey . 
Now it is their fellow Turks arriving as refugees from Bulgaria . 
The Turkish refugee tragedy and the ongoing crisis can not be ignored and shuttled off to that notorious dustbin of history that has become so convenient recently . 
Surely , the past suffering of any people at any time can not be simply filed away and forgotten . 
But what the Senate Judiciary Committee has done in supporting the strongly worded Armenian resolution achieves no useful end ; it merely produces more controversy and embittered memories . 
Congress has enough difficulty dealing with the realities of the world as it currently exists . 
Bulgaria 's government has been behaving beyond the pale for months , and the U.S. does its values no credit by ignoring that while casting its votes into the past . 
Many in Washington say President Bush will have to raise taxes to pay for his war on drugs . 
We have a better idea : Dismantle HUD to pay for the war on drugs . 
Housing and Urban Development 's budget is $ 17 billion . 
From what we and the nation have been reading , the money is n't being spent very well . 
The single most important contribution the government could make now to help the poor is to get the specter of drugs out of their neighborhoods . 
If that takes money , take it away from this discredited federal department . 
But of course the Democrats pillorying HUD in hearings and in the press have no such solution in mind . 
Instead , they 're scrambling to protect the very programs at the heart of the HUD scandal . 
This month , HUD Secretary Jack Kemp unveiled a series of proposed reforms to improve management at HUD . 
No doubt many of his ideas are worthy , but ultimately he is proposing to make fundamentally flawed programs work slightly more fairly and efficiently . 
Congress is unlikely to go even that far . 
Last week , Secretary Kemp ran into a buzzsaw of criticism from House Banking Committee members . 
They were appalled , for instance , that he wanted to target more of the $ 3 billion Community Development Block Grant ( CDBG ) program to low-income projects and zero out the notorious `` discretionary '' funds that have allowed HUD officials to steer contracts to political cronies . 
These development grants mainly enrich developers who want to put up shopping centers and parking garages . 
They also give those in Congress political credit for bringing home the pork , and so they are popular with such Members as Mary Rose Oakar . 
Rep. Oakar , a Democrat from Cleveland , wants a $ 6.9 million grant so Cleveland can build an 18-story Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . 
She says it 'd create 600 jobs and bring Cleveland tourist revenue . 
HUD says the project does n't qualify , and Mr. Kemp says that rock 'n' roll musicians and the music industry ought to put up the money . 
At the hearing , Rep. Oakar started wailing about `` phoney baloney regulations '' that would stand between her and `` housing for downtown Cleveland . '' 
Rep. Chalmers Wylie , an Ohio Republican , rallied to the cause : `` I think the gentlelady is making an important statement . 
The implication that if a congressman calls about a project in his district there 's something wrong , I think is most unfortunate . '' 
We 're sure some theologian can explain the difference between what the Republican consultants have been doing with HUD and what these gentleladies and gentlemen want to do with HUD . 
Our view is that given Congress 's attitude toward HUD , the place probably is beyond reform . 
For more than 50 years the federal government has tried various ways to provide housing for the poor and revive cities . 
In the process HUD has wasted untold billions , created slums and invited corruption . 
Much of HUD 's spending actually is disguised welfare for developers or the middle class . 
That includes the CDBG funds and the Federal Housing Administration , which loans out money for private home mortgages and has just been discovered to be $ 4 billion in the hole . 
Selling the FHA 's loan portfolio to the highest bidder would save the taxpayers untold billions in future losses . 
Some HUD money actually does trickle down to the poor , and zeroing out housing middlemen would free up more money for public housing tenants to manage and even own their units . 
The rest ought to be used to clean out drugs from the neighbhorhoods . 
Rival gangs have turned cities into combat zones . 
Even suburban Prince George 's County , Md. , reported last week there have been a record 96 killings there this year , most of them drug-related . 
Innocent bystanders often are the victims . 
A man in a wheelchair was gunned down in the crossfire of a Miami drug battle . 
A three-year-old Brooklyn boy was used as a shield by a drug dealer . 
Decent life in the inner cities wo n't be restored unless the government reclaims the streets from the drug gangs . 
Until then , the billions HUD spends on inner-city housing simply is wasted . 
It 's still unclear whether Secretary Kemp wants to completely overhaul the engine room at HUD or just tighten a few screws here and there . 
No doubt he believes the place can be salvaged . 
Having seen the hypocrisy with which Congress has addressed the HUD scandals , we disagree . 
It 's time to scrap the politically infested spending machine HUD has become and channel the resources into the drug war . 
Randy Delchamps was named chairman and chief executive officer of this grocery chain . 
Mr. Delchamps , 46 years old , succeeds A.F. Delchamps Jr. , who died in a plane crash on Sunday at the age of 58 . 
Randy Delchamps retains his position as president . 
Natural upheavals , and most particularly earthquakes , are not only horrible realities in and of themselves , but also symbols through which the state of a society can be construed . 
The rubble after the Armenian earthquake a year ago disclosed , quite literally , a city whose larger structures had been built with sand . 
The extent of the disaster stemmed from years of chicanery and bureaucratic indifference . 
The larger parallel after the earthquake centered south of San Francisco is surely with the state of the U.S. economy . 
Did the stock-market tremors of Friday , Oct. 13 , presage larger fragility , far greater upheavals ? 
Are the engineering and architecture of the economy as vulnerable as the spans of the Bay Bridge ? 
The eerie complacency of the Reagan-Bush era has produced Panglossian paeans about the present perfection of U.S. economic and social arrangements . 
A licensed government intellectual , Francis Fukuyama , recently announced in The National Interest that history is , so to speak , at an end since the course of human progress has now culminated in the glorious full stop of American civilization . 
His observations were taken seriously . 
But we are , in reality , witnessing the continuing decline of the political economy of capitalism : not so much the end of history but the history of the end . 
The financial equivalent of the sand used by those Armenian contractors is junk bonds and the leveraged buy-outs associated with them . 
Builders get away with using sand and financiers junk when society decides it 's okay , necessary even , to look the other way . 
And by the early 1980s U.S. capitalists had ample reason to welcome junk bonds , to look the other way . 
By that time they found extremely low profit rates from non-financial corporate investment . 
Government statistics in fact show that the profit rate -- net pretax profits divided by capital stock -- peaked in 1965 at 17.2 % . 
That same calculation saw profit rates fall to 4.6 % in the recession year 1982 and the supposed miracle that followed has seen the profit rate rise only to 8.1 % in 1986 and 8 % in 1987 . 
Corresponding to the fall in profit rates was -- in the early 1980s -- the drop in the number arrived at if you divide the market value of firms by the replacement costs of their assets , the famous Q ratio associated with Prof. James Tobin . 
In theory , the value attached to a firm by the market and the cost of replacing its assets should be the same . 
But of course the market could decide that the firm 's capital stock -- its assets -- means nothing if the firm is not producing profits . 
This is indeed what the market decided . 
By 1982 the ratio was 43.5 % , meaning that the market was valuing every dollar 's worth of the average firm 's assets at 43 cents . 
From the history of capitalism we can take it as a sound bet that if it takes only 43 cents to buy a dollar 's worth of a firm 's capital stock , an alert entrepreneur wo n't look the other way . 
His assumption is that the underlying profitability rate will go up and the capital assets he bought on the cheap will soon be producing profits , thus restoring the market 's faith in them . 
Hence the LBO craze . 
But here is where the entrepreneur made a very risky bet , and where society was maybe foolish to look the other way . 
The profit rate is still low and the Q ratio was only 65 % in 1987 and 68.9 % in 1988 . 
Result : a landscape littered with lemons , huge debt burdens crushing down upon the arch and spans of corporate America . 
The mounting risks did not go unobserved , even in the mid-1980s . 
But there were enough promoters announcing the end of history ( in this case suspension of normal laws of economic gravity ) for society to continue shielding its eyes . 
Mainstream economists and commentators , craning their necks up at the great pyramids of junk financing , swiveling their heads to watch the avalanche of leveraged buy-outs , claimed the end result would be a leaner , meaner corporate America , with soaring productivity and profits and the weaker gone to the wall . 
But this is not where the rewards of junk financing were found . 
The beneficiaries were those financiers whose icon was the topic figure of '80s capitalism , Michael Milken 's $ 517 million salary in one year . 
Left-stream economists I associate with -- fellows in the Union of Radical Political Economists , most particularly Robert Pollin of the economics faculty at the University of California at Riverside -- were not hypnotized in the manner of their pliant colleagues . 
All along they have been noting the tremors and pointing out the underlying realities . 
Profit rates after the great merger wave are no higher , and now we have an extremely high-interest burden relative to cash flow . 
The consequences of building empires with sand are showing up . 
In contrast to previous estimates reckoning the default rate on junk bonds at 2 % or 3 % , a Harvard study published in April of this year ( and discussed in a lead story in The Wall Street Journal for Sept. 18 ) found the default rate on these junk bonds is 34 % . 
What is the consequence of a high-interest burden , high default rates and continued low profitability ? 
Corporations need liquidity , in the form of borrowed funds . 
Without liquidity from the junk-bond market or cash flow from profits , they look to the government , which obediently assists the natural motions of the capitalist economy with charity in the form of cuts in the capital-gains tax rate or bailouts . 
The consequence can be inflation , brought on as the effect of a desperate bid to avoid the deflationary shock of a sudden crash . 
Attacks on inflation come with another strategy of capital of a very traditional sort : an assault on wages . 
Mr. Fukuyama , peering through binoculars at the end of history , said in his essay that `` the class issue has actually been successfully resolved in the West ... 
the egalitarianism of modern America represents the essential achievement of the classless society envisioned by Marx . '' 
Mr. Fukuyama might want to consult some American workers on the subject of class and egalitarianism . 
From its peak in 1972 of $ 198.41 , the average American weekly wage had fallen to $ 169.28 in 1987 -- both figures being expressed in 1977 dollars . 
In other words , after the glory boom of the Reagan years , wages had sunk from the post World War II peak by 16 % as capitalists , helped by the government , turned down the screws or went offshore . 
But there are signs now -- the strikes by miners , Boeing workers , telephone workers , etc. -- that this attack on wages is being more fiercely resisted . 
These are long-term Richter readings on American capitalism . 
The whole structure is extremely shaky . 
Governments have become sophisticated in handling moments of panic ( a word the London Times forbade my father to use when he was reporting the Wall Street crash in 1929 ) . 
But sophistication has its limits . 
The S&L bailout could cost $ 300 billion , computing interest on the government 's loans . 
These are real costs . 
Under what weights will the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation totter ? 
Capitalism may now be engineered to withstand sudden shocks , but there are fault lines -- the crisis in profits , the assault on wages , the structural inequity of the system -- that make fools of those who claim that the future is here and that history is over . 
Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation and LA Weekly . 
Japan Air Lines , Lufthansa German Airlines and Air France reportedly plan to form an international air-freight company this year , a move that could further consolidate the industry . 
Japanese newspaper Nihon Keizai Shimbun reported that the three giants plan to integrate their cargo computers and ground-cargo and air-cargo systems . 
They reportedly will invest a total of 20 billion yen ( $ 140 million ) in the venture , whose headquarters would be in France or West Germany . 
The action follows Federal Express Corp. 's acquisition of Flying Tiger Line Inc. in August . 
After that , `` it would make sense for airlines to talk about doing things jointly , '' said Cotton Daly , director of cargo services for New York consulting firm Simat , Helliesen & Eichner Inc . 
Mr. Daly said such discussions are motivated by the competitive threat posed by Federal Express , United Parcel Service of America Inc. and other fast-growing air-freight companies . 
Many airlines are talking about cargo ventures , and there have been rumors about such a tie between JAL and European airlines . 
In Tokyo , a JAL spokesman said he could n't confirm or deny the latest Japanese report . 
But he said JAL is talking to Lufthansa and Air France about some sort of cargo venture . 
`` It is just one of a number of strategies JAL has embarked upon to come to terms with the situation in Europe after 1992 , '' the deadline for ending trade barriers in the EC , he said . 
In Frankfurt , a Lufthansa spokesman confirmed talks are under way , but declined to comment . 
A Lufthansa spokeswoman in Tokyo said the head of Lufthansa 's cargo operations had been in Toyko last week for talks with JAL . 
In Paris , Air France declined to comment . 
`` Nothing is defined or signed at this point , '' Mr. Daly said of the talks . 
Whatever accord the three carriers reach , he said , he is skeptical it would create a separate airline . 
If the three companies pool their air-freight businesses , their clout would be considerable . 
According to figures from the International Air Transport Association , they carried a combined 1.8 million tons of freight last year . 
Federal Express and Flying Tiger , as separate companies , carried a combined 2.6 million tons . 
Air France and Lufthansa last month concluded a far-reaching cooperation accord that includes air-freight activities . 
They plan to increase cooperation in freight ground-handling and create a world-wide computer system to process cargo . 
Other airlines would have access to the system , they said , and negotiations with partners were already under way . 
Both European airlines operate extensive fleets of Boeing 747 freighters and 747 Combis , aircraft that carry both freight and passengers on the main deck . 
They currently have large orders for cargo planes . 
Several airlines , including Lufthansa , JAL and Cathay Pacific Airways , are working on a so-called global cargo system and are trying to attract other carriers to join , Mr. Daly said . 
JAL also has signaled it is looking for toeholds in Europe before the end of 1992 . 
Last month , the carrier said it wanted to lease crews and planes from British Airways so it could funnel its passengers from London to other European destinations . 
British Airways said it has n't received a proposal from JAL . 
But last week there were air-traffic negotiations between the U.K. and Japan , a likely first step to any commercial agreement between JAL and British Airways or another U.K. carrier . 
Federal Paper Board Co. said it completed the previously announced purchase of Imperial Cup Corp. , a closely held maker of paper cups based in Kenton , Ohio . 
Terms were n't disclosed . 
Imperial Cup has annual sales of approximately $ 75 million . 
Federal Paper Board sells paper and wood products . 
In a move to prevent any dislocation in the financial markets from the California earthquake , the Securities and Exchange Commission said it temporarily reassigned options listed on the Pacific Stock Exchange to the American , New York and Philadelphia stock exchanges and to the Chicago Board Options Exchange . 
The decision , which affects millions of dollars of trading positions , was made late yesterday because the Pacific exchange 's options floor was shut down as a result of Tuesday 's earthquake . 
The SEC , faced with a major squeeze on options positions , said it was necessary to ensure that options listed on the exchange could be traded today and tomorrow . 
SEC Chairman Richard Breeden said the cooperation by the exchanges would enable investors to buy and sell options listed solely on the Pacific exchange , guaranteeing the liquidity of the market . 
Officials at the four exchanges said well over 50 traders from the Pacific exchange were taking flights from San Francisco late yesterday to the American , New York and Philadelphia exchanges and to the CBOE , where they would continue making markets in the Pacific-listed options . 
The Big Board said carpenters quickly erected a new options floor to accomodate 40 traders from the Pacific exchange . 
In addition , specialists on the exchanges agreed to provide backup capital for market-making in Pacific exchange options traded on the exchanges . 
Trading was light on the Pacific Stock Exchange yesterday , with workers at the exchange 's main floor in San Francisco struggling to execute orders by flashlight as a result of a continuing power outage . 
The most pressing problem was the suspension of options trading . 
The Pacific exchange has options for 129 underlying stock issues , including highly active Hilton Hotels Corp. , which is listed on the Big Board . 
Investors were concerned that they might be unable to exercise options that expire tomorrow . 
But professionals said throughout the day that the shutdown would n't be a cause for alarm even if it were to persist for several days . 
`` I 've told my staff and clients that they still have the ability to exercise their options , because they are guaranteed by the Options Clearing Corp. , '' said Michael Schwartz , a senior registered options strategist at Oppenheimer & Co . 
The SEC reassigned trading in the options , however , to allow investors to do more than simply exercise the options . 
While the exchange 's equities floor in San Francisco remained open on a limited basis , orders were being routed and executed in Los Angeles . 
Workers could dial out , but they could n't receive telephone calls . 
`` It 's a very uncertain situation right now , '' said Navin Vyas , administrative assistant of trading floor operations of the exchange , which has daily volume of about 10 million shares . 
Because the exchange 's computer was rerouting orders to the exchange 's trading operations in Los Angeles , `` business is as usual '' Mr. Vyas said . 
`` If one city is down , the other can take over . '' 
Meanwhile , the brokerage firms in San Francisco were trying to cope . 
Charles Daggs , chairman and chief executive officer of Sutro & Co. , said traders came to work at 5 a.m. PDT -- many on foot because of uncertain road and traffic conditions -- but learned that they would have to await a required inspection by the city in order to turn the power back on at the company 's two main facilities there . 
That should happen by today , he said . 
Traders worked with the help of sunlight streaming through windows , despite large cracks in the walls and a lack of incoming phone calls . 
Also , most of the telecommunications equipment was out . 
The traders were executing municipal bond , mutual fund and other orders through a sister firm , Tucker Anthony Inc. , which is also owned by John Hancock Freedom Securities but is based in New York . 
`` We are having a regular day . 
Volume is down out of San Francisco , but not out of the 11 outlying offices , '' Mr. Daggs added . 
Sutro 's Oakland office executed orders through the Sacramento office , which was n't affected by the quake . 
Others , like Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. , which has eight offices in the San Francisco area , set up an 800 number yesterday morning for customers to obtain market commentary and other help . 
At Kidder , Peabody & Co. 's Sacramento branch , Manager Janet White received calls yesterday morning from workers in San Francisco who offered to work in Sacramento . 
Then she discovered that Quotron Systems Inc. 's Sacramento lines were down , because they are normally tied in through a system that goes through San Francisco . 
So the Kidder brokers had to call other company offices to get quotes on stocks . 
At Quotron , the company 's National Call-In Center , which swung into action for the first time last month for Hurricane Hugo , assembled a tactical team at 5 a.m. yesterday to begin rerouting lines and restore service to brokers and traders . 
The company dispatched as many as 200 people in the San Francisco area to do the work , though most of the rerouting was done by computer . 
Service appeared to be down throughout the financial district in downtown San Francisco , while just parts of Oakland and San Jose were knocked out . 
But Dale Irvine , director of the emergency center , said service was being restored to outlying San Francisco areas . 
In Chicago yesterday , Options Clearing confirmed that it guarantees the Pacific exchange options . 
The firm also will permit its members and the public `` to exercise their put and call options contracts traded on the Pacific exchange '' even if the exchange is closed , said Wayne Luthringshausen , chairman of Options Clearing . 
( Put options give holders the right , but not the obligation , to sell a financial instrument at a specified price , while call options give holders the right , but not the obligation , to buy a financial instrument at a specified price ) . 
Investors and traders in Pacific exchange options `` are protected to the extent that they can convert their put and call options into the underlying instrument , '' Mr. Luthringshausen said . 
`` We are seeing such exercises today , in fact . 
International Business Machines Corp. said its board approved the purchase of $ 1 billion of its common shares , a move that should help support its battered stock . 
Even as the stock market has generally done well this year , IBM 's shares have slipped steadily from its 52-week high of $ 130.875 . 
Yesterday 's closing price of $ 101.75 , down 50 cents , in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , puts the stock at about 1 1\/2 times book value , which is as low as it has sunk over the past decade . 
The announcement came after the market 's close . 
The move by IBM was n't exactly a surprise . 
The company has spent some $ 5 billion over the past 3 1\/2 years to buy back 42 million common shares , or roughly 7 % of those outstanding . 
In addition , despite IBM 's well-publicized recent problems , the computer giant still generates enormous amounts of cash . 
As of the end of the second quarter , it had $ 4.47 billion of cash and marketable securities on hand . 
As a result , some securities analysts had predicted in recent days that IBM would authorize additional purchases . 
In Armonk , N.Y. , a spokesman said that although IBM did n't view its spending as necessarily a way to support the stock , it thought the purchases were a good way to improve such financial measurements as per-share earnings and return on equity . 
`` We view it as a good long-term investment , '' the spokesman said . 
In the short term , the move is likely to have little effect . 
At yesterday 's closing price , $ 1 billion would buy back about 10 million shares , or less than 2 % of the roughly 580 million outstanding . 
In addition , as of Sept. 30 , the company still had authorization to buy $ 368 million of stock under a prior repurchase program . 
Over the long term , however , IBM 's stock repurchases -- along with its hefty , $ 4.84-a-share annual dividend and generally loyal following among large institutional investors -- are providing a floor for the stock price . 
Although IBM last year produced its first strong results in four years and was expected to continue to roll this year , it began faltering as early as January . 
First , it had trouble manufacturing a chip for its mainframes , IBM 's bread-and-butter business . 
Then it had a series of smaller glitches , including problems manufacturing certain personal computers and the delay in the announcement of some important workstations . 
Finally , IBM had to delay the introduction of some high-end disk drives , which account for 10 % of its $ 60 billion of annual revenue . 
None of the problems is necessarily fatal , and they are n't all necessarily even related . 
There are also other factors at work that are outside IBM 's control , such as currency exchange rates . 
The strong dollar , which reduces the value of overseas earnings and revenue when they are translated into dollars , is expected to knock 80 to 85 cents off IBM 's per-share earnings for the full year . 
Without that problem , IBM might have matched last year 's earnings of $ 5.81 billion , or $ 9.80 a share . 
Still , investors will take some convincing before they get back into IBM 's stock in a big way . 
Steve Milunovich , a securities analyst at First Boston , said that while investors were looking for an excuse to buy IBM shares a year ago , even the big institutional investors are looking for a reason to avoid the stock these days . 
On Wall Street yesterday , northern California 's killer earthquake was just another chance to make a buck . 
At the opening bell , investors quickly began singling out shares of companies expected to profit or suffer in some way from the California disaster , including insurers , construction-related companies , refiners and housing lenders . 
Brokerage houses jumped in , touting `` post-quake demand '' stocks , and Kidder , Peabody & Co. set up a toll-free hot line for San Franciscans who might need emergency investment advice and help in transferring funds . 
`` Wall Street thinks of everything in terms of money , '' says Tom Gallagher , a senior Oppenheimer & Co. trader . 
However , he added , such event-driven trading moves typically last only a few hours and are often made without full information . 
The most popular plays of the day were insurance companies such as General Re Corp. , which rose $ 2.75 to $ 86.50 , Nac Re Corp. , up $ 2 to $ 37.75 , American International Group Inc. , up $ 3.25 to $ 102.625 , and Cigna Corp. , up 87.5 cents to $ 62.50 . 
Yesterday , the brokerage firm Conning & Co. said insurers will use the earthquake as an excuse to raise insurance rates , ending their long price wars . 
Before this bullish theory surfaced , some insurance stocks initially fell , indicating that investors thought the quake might cost insurers a lot of money . 
In fact , Fireman 's Fund Corp. , which ended the day off 50 cents to $ 36.50 , said earthquake damage would slightly hurt fourth-quarter profit . 
On the prospect for rebuilding northern California , investors bid up cement-makers Calmat Co. , up $ 2.75 to $ 28.75 , and Lone Star Industries Inc. , up $ 1.75 to $ 29.25 . 
Bridge and road builders had a field day , including Kasler Corp. , up $ 2.125 to $ 9.875 , Guy F. Atkinson Co. , up 87.5 to $ 61.875 , and Morrison Knudsen Corp. , which reported higher third-quarter earnings yesterday , up $ 2.25 to $ 44.125 . 
Fluor Corp. , a construction engineering firm , gained 75 cents to $ 33.375 . 
But home-building stocks were a mixed bag . 
Timber stocks got a big boost . 
Georgia Pacific Corp. , up $ 1.25 to $ 58 , and Maxxam Inc. , up $ 3 to $ 43.75 , both reported strong profits . 
Merrill Lynch & Co. touted Georgia-Pacific , Louisiana Pacific Corp. and Willamette Industries Inc. as the best post-quake plywood plays . 
Other gainers were companies with one or more undamaged California refineries . 
Tosco Corp. jumped $ 1.125 to $ 20.125 and Chevron Corp. , despite a temporary pipeline shutdown , rose $ 1 to $ 65 . 
Meanwhile , shares of some big housing lenders got hit , on the likelihood that the lenders ' collateral -- people 's homes -- suffered physical damage and perhaps a loss in value . 
Wells Fargo & Co. fell 50 cents to $ 81.50 , and BankAmerica Corp. fell 50 cents to $ 31.875 . 
Some California thrift stocks also fell , including Golden West Financial Corp. and H.F. Ahmanson & Co. , which reported lower earnings yesterday . 
`` Property values did n't go up in California yesterday , '' says one money manager . 
Pacific Gas & Electric Co. fell 37.5 cents to $ 19.625 . 
One of its power generators was damaged , though the company said there wo n't be any financial impact . 
Pacific Telesis Group lost 62.5 cents to $ 44.625 . 
A computer failure delayed its earnings announcement , and some investors think it might have extra costs to repair damaged telephone lines . 
Heavy construction , property-casualty insurance and forest products were among the best performing industry groups in the Dow Jones Equity Market Index yesterday . 
Friday 's stock market plunge claimed its second victim among the scores of futures and options trading firms here . 
Petco Options , an options trading firm owned by the family of the deceased former Chicago Board of Trade chairman Ralph Peters , is getting out of the trade clearing , or processing and guaranteeing , business after sustaining a multimillion dollar loss Friday , options industry officials said . 
Nearly 75 options traders on the Chicago Board Options Exchange who cleared trades through Petco , including a handful of traders who lost between $ 500,000 to $ 1 million themselves as a result of Friday 's debacle , are trying to transfer their business to other clearing firms , CBOE members said . 
Timothy Vincent , Petco chief executive officer , confirmed that Petco was withdrawing from the clearing business . 
`` The owners of the company got a look at the potential risks in this business , and after Monday they felt they did n't want to be exposed any more , '' he said . 
He added that Petco remained in compliance with all industry capital requirements during the market 's rapid plunge Friday and Monday 's rebound . 
A CBOE spokeswoman declined comment on Petco . 
Over the weekend Fossett Corp. , another options trading firm , transferred the clearing accounts of about 160 traders to First Options of Chicago , a unit of Continental Bank Corp. , because it could n't meet regulatory capital requirements after Friday 's market slide . 
The unprecedented transfer of accounts underscored the options industry 's desire not to have its credibility tarnished by potentially widespread trading defaults on Monday . 
The CBOE , American Stock Exchange , Options Clearing Corp. and Stephen Fossett , owner of Fossett , joined in putting up $ 50 million to guarantee the accounts at First Options . 
The head of another small options clearing firm , who asked not to be identified , said that the heightened volatility in the financial markets in recent years makes it increasingly difficult for any but the largest financial trading firms to shoulder the risk inherent in the highly leveraged options and futures business . 
Prior to the introduction of financial futures in the late 1970s , most trading firms clustered around the LaSalle Street financial district here were family operations handed down from one generation to the next . 
Most also were relatively undercapitalized compared with the size of most Wall Street securities firms . 
Mr. Peters , a LaSalle Street legend among the post-World War II generation of commodity traders , was rumored to have amassed a multimillion-dollar fortune from commodity trading and other activities by the time he died in May . 
Part of a Series } 
Betty Lombardi is a mild-mannered homemaker and grandmother in rural Hunterdon County , N.J . 
But put her behind a shopping cart and she turns ruthless . 
If Colgate toothpaste offers a tempting money-saving coupon , she 'll cross Crest off her shopping list without a second thought . 
Never mind that her husband prefers Crest . 
Some weeks when her supermarket runs a double-coupon promotion , she boasts that she shaves $ 22 off her bill . 
Money is n't the only thing that makes her dump once favorite brands . 
After she heard about the artery-clogging hazards of tropical oils in many cookies , she dropped Pepperidge Farm and started buying brands free of such oils . 
`` I always thought Pepperidge Farm was tasty and high quality , '' Mrs. Lombardi says . 
`` But I do n't want any of that oil for my grandkids . '' 
( Pepperidge Farm says it ca n't tell exactly how many customers it has lost , but it hopes to remove the objectionable tropical oil from all its products by year end . ) 
Clearly , people like Mrs. Lombardi are giving marketers fits . 
She represents a new breed of savvy consumer who puts bargain prices , nutritional and environmental concerns , and other priorities ahead of old-fashioned brand loyalty . 
While brand loyalty is far from dead , marketing experts say it has eroded during the 1980s . 
Marketers themselves are partly to blame : They 've increased spending for coupons and other short-term promotions at the expense of image-building advertising . 
What 's more , a flood of new products has given consumers a dizzying choice of brands , many of which are virtually carbon copies of one other . 
`` Marketers have brought this on themselves with their heavy use '' of promotions , contends Joe Plummer , an executive vice president at the D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles ad agency . 
`` Without some real product improvements , it 's going to be difficult to win that loyalty back . '' 
The Wall Street Journal 's `` American Way of Buying '' survey this year found that most consumers switch brands for many of the products they use . 
For the survey , Peter D. Hart Research Associates asked some 2,000 consumers , including Mrs. Lombardi , whether they usually buy one brand of a certain type of product or have no brand loyalty . 
More than half the users of 17 of the 25 products included in the survey said they 're brand switchers . 
Overall , 12 % of consumers are n't brand loyal for any of the 25 product categories . 
About 47 % are loyal for one to five of the products . 
Only 2 % are brand loyal in 16 to 20 of the categories , and no one is loyal for more than 20 types of products . 
For such products as canned vegetables and athletic shoes , devotion to a single brand was quite low , with fewer than 30 % saying they usually buy the same brand . 
Only for cigarettes , mayonnaise and toothpaste did more than 60 % of users say they typically stick with the same brand . 
People tend to be most loyal to brands that have distinctive flavors , such as cigarettes and ketchup . 
Kathie Huff , a respondent in the Journal survey from Spokane , Wash. , says her husband is adamant about eating only Hunt 's ketchup . 
He simply ca n't stomach the taste of Heinz , she says . 
The 31-year-old homemaker adds , `` The only other thing I 'm really loyal to is my Virginia Slims cigarettes . 
Coke and Pepsi are all the same to me , and I usually buy whichever brand of coffee happens to be on sale . '' 
Brand imagery plays a significant role in loyalty to such products as cigarettes , perfume and beer . 
People often stay with a particular brand because they want to be associated with the image its advertising conveys , whether that 's macho Marlboro cigarettes or Cher 's Uninhibited perfume . 
Loyalty lags most for utilitarian products like trash bags and batteries . 
Only 23 % of trash-bag users in the Journal survey usually buy the same brand , and just 29 % of battery buyers stick to one brand . 
Underwear scored a middling 36 % in brand loyalty , but consumer researchers say that 's actually quite high for such a mundane product . 
`` In the past , you just wore Fruit of the Loom and did n't care , '' says Peter Kim , U.S. director of consumer behavior research for the J. Walter Thompson ad agency . 
`` The high score reflects the attempts to make underwear more of a fashion image business for both men and women . '' 
He believes there 's opportunity for a smart gasoline marketer to create a strong brand image and more consumer loyalty . 
What loyalty there is to gas brands , he believes , is a matter of stopping at the most conveniently located service stations . 
Brand loyalty was stronger among older consumers in the Journal survey . 
Nearly one-fourth of participants age 60 and older claim brand loyalty for more than 10 of the 25 products in the survey ; only 9 % of those age 18 to 29 have such strong allegiance . 
Higher-income people also tend to be more brand loyal these days , the Journal survey and other research studies indicate . 
Marketers speculate that more affluent people tend to lead more pressured lives and do n't have time to research the products they buy for the highest quality and most reasonable price . 
An established brand name is insurance that at least the product will be of acceptable quality , if not always the best value for the money . 
It 's sort of loyalty by default . 
Meanwhile , `` the bottom end of the market is becoming less loyal , '' says Laurel Cutler , vice chairman of the ad agency FCB / Leber Katz Partners . 
`` They 're buying whatever 's cheaper . '' 
The biggest wild card in the brand loyalty game : How those hotly pursued but highly unpredictable baby boomers will behave as they move into middle age . 
They grew up with more brand choices than any generation and have shown less allegiance so far . 
But now that they 're settling down and raising families , might they also show more stability in their brand choices ? 
Mr. Kim of J. Walter Thompson does n't think so . 
He believes baby boomers will continue to be selective in their brand loyalties . 
`` Earlier generations were brand loyal across categories , '' he says , `` but boomers tend to be brand loyal in categories like running shoes and bottled water , but less so in others like toilet paper and appliances . '' 
While not as brand loyal as in the past , consumers today do n't buy products capriciously , either . 
Rather , they tend to have a set of two or three favorites . 
Sometimes , they 'll choose Ragu spaghetti sauce ; other times , it will be Prego . 
Advertisers attribute this shared loyalty to the striking similarity among brands . 
If a more absorbent Pampers hits the market , you can be sure a new and improved Huggies wo n't be far behind . 
The BBDO Worldwide ad agency studied `` brand parity '' and found that consumers believe all brands are about the same in a number of categories , particularly credit cards , paper towels , dry soups and snack chips . 
`` When there 's a clutter of brands , consumers simplify the complexity by telling themselves , ` All brands are the same so what difference does it make which I buy , ' '' says Karen Olshan , a senior vice president at BBDO . 
`` Too often , advertising imagery has n't done a good job of forging a special emotional bond between a brand and the consumer . '' 
But given such strong brand disloyalty , some marketers are putting renewed emphasis on image advertising . 
A small but growing number of companies are also trying to instill more fervent brand loyalty through such personalized direct-marketing ploys as catalogs , magazines and membership clubs for brand users . 
While discount promotions are essential for most brands , some companies concede they went overboard in shifting money from advertising to coupons , refunds and other sales incentives . 
Some people argue that strong brands can afford to stop advertising for a time because of the residual impact of hundreds of millions of dollars spent on advertising through the years . 
But most companies are too afraid to take that chance . 
And perhaps with good reason . 
Says Clayt Wilhite , president of the D'Arcy Masius ad agency 's U.S. division , `` Every time 24 hours pass without any advertising reinforcement , brand loyalty will diminish ever so slightly -- even for a powerful brand like Budweiser . '' 
Consider , for example , what happened to Maxwell House coffee . 
The Kraft General Foods brand stopped advertising for about a year in 1987 and gave up several market share points and its leadership position in the coffee business . 
But since returning to advertising , Maxwell House has regained the lost share and is running neck and neck with archrival Folgers . 
`` Now , Philip Morris { Kraft General Foods ' parent company } is committed to the coffee business and to increased advertising for Maxwell House , '' says Dick Mayer , president of the General Foods USA division . 
`` Even though brand loyalty is rather strong for coffee , we need advertising to maintain and strengthen it . '' 
Campbell Soup Co. , for one , has concluded that it makes good sense to focus more on its most loyal customers than on people who buy competitive brands . 
`` The probability of converting a non-user to your brand is about three in 1,000 , '' says Tony Adams , the company 's vice president for marketing research . 
`` The best odds are with your core franchise . 
Our heavy users consume two to three cans of soup a week , and we 'd like to increase that . '' 
So Campbell is talking to its `` brand enthusiasts , '' probing their psychological attachment to its soup . 
In one consumer focus group , a fan declared that , `` Campbell 's soup is like getting a hug from a friend . '' 
That helped persuade the company to introduce a new advertising slogan : `` A warm hug from Campbell 's . '' 
Insurers face the prospect of paying out billions of dollars for damages caused by this week 's California earthquake . 
Getting a grip on the extent of the damages is proving a far more difficult task than what insurers faced after Hurricane Hugo ripped through the Caribbean and the Carolinas last month . 
The earthquake 's toll , including possible deep structural damage , goes far beyond the more easily observed damage from a hurricane , says George Reider , a vice president in Aetna Life & Casualty Insurance Co. 's claims division . 
But investors are betting that the financial and psychological impact of the earthquake , coming so soon after the hurricane , will help stem more than two years of intense price-cutting wars among business insurers . 
Reflecting that logic , insurance-company stocks posted strong gains . 
Aetna and other insurers are hiring engineers and architects to help them assess structural damage . 
Most insurers already have mobilized their `` catastrophe '' teams to begin processing claims from their policyholders in northern California . 
Since commercial air travel is interrupted , Aetna , based in Hartford , Conn. , chartered three planes to fly claims adjusters into Sacramento and then planned for them to drive to the Bay area . 
About 25 adjusters were dispatched yesterday afternoon , along with laptop computers , cellular phones and blank checks . 
Some adjusters , already in other parts of California , drove to the disaster area with recreational vehicles and mobile homes that could be used as makeshift claims-processing centers . 
Insurers will be advertising 800 numbers -- probably on the radio -- that policyholders can call to get assistance on how to submit claims . 
State Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. , the largest home and auto insurer in California , believes the losses from the earthquake could be somewhat less than the $ 475 million in damages it expects to pay out for claims resulting from Hurricane Hugo . 
State Farm , based in Bloomington , Ind. , is also the largest writer of personal-property earthquake insurance in California . 
Earthquake insurance is sold as a separate policy or a specific endorsement `` rider '' on a homeowner 's policy in California , because of the area 's vulnerability to earthquakes . 
State Farm said about 25 % of its policyholders in California have also purchased earthquake insurance . 
Allstate Insurance Co. , a unit of Sears , Roebuck & Co. , said about 23 % of its personal property policyholders -- about 28 % in the San Franciso area -- also have earthquake coverage . 
The Association of California Insurance Companies estimated damage to residential property could total $ 500 million , but only $ 100 million to $ 150 million is insured , it said . 
Officials from the American Insurance Association 's property-claim service division , which coordinates the efforts of the claims adjusters in an area after a natural disaster , will be flying to San Francisco today . 
They expect to have a preliminary estimate of the damages in a day or two . 
Roads and bridges in the Bay area appear to have suffered some of the most costly damage . 
Highways , such as the section of Interstate 880 that collapsed in Oakland , generally do n't have insurance coverage . 
Industry officials say the Bay Bridge -- unlike some bridges -- has no earthquake coverage , either , so the cost of repairing it probably would have to be paid out of state general operating funds . 
However , the bridge , which charges a $ 1 toll each way , does have `` loss of income '' insurance to replace lost revenue if the operation of the bridge is interrupted for more than seven days . 
That coverage is provided by a syndicate of insurance companies including Fireman 's Fund Corp. , based in Novato , Calif. , and Cigna Corp. , based in Philadelphia . 
Earthquake-related claims are n't expected to cause significant financial problems for the insurance industry as a whole . 
Instead , even with the liabilities of two natural disasters in recent weeks , analysts said the total capital of the industry is likely to be higher at year end than it was at midyear . 
Indeed , the earthquake could contribute to a turnaround in the insurance cycle in a couple of ways . 
For example , insurers may seek to limit their future exposure to catastrophes by increasing the amount of reinsurance they buy . 
Such increased demand for reinsurance , along with the losses the reinsurers will bear from these two disasters , are likely to spur increases in reinsurance prices that will later be translated into an overall price rise . 
Reinsurance is protection taken out by the insurance firms themselves . 
`` We are saying this is the breaking point , this is the event that will change the psychology of the marketplace , '' said William Yankus , an analyst with Conning & Co. , a Hartford firm that specializes in the insurance industry . 
His firm , along with some others , issued new buy recommendations on insurer stocks yesterday . 
Among the insurance stocks , big gainers included American International Group , up $ 3.25 to $ 102.625 ; General Re Corp. , up $ 2.75 to $ 86.50 ; Aetna , up $ 2.375 to $ 59.50 ; and Marsh & McLennan Inc. , up $ 3.125 to $ 75.875 . 
Still , a few individual companies , most likely smaller ones , could be devastated . 
`` I think there is a damned good chance someone is going to hit the skids on this , '' said Oppenheimer & Co. analyst Myron Picoult . 
He suspects some insurers who had purchased reinsurance to limit their exposure to catastrophes will discover that reinsurance was used up by Hurricane Hugo . 
British , West German , Scandinavian and other overseas insurers are bracing for big claims from the San Francisco earthquake disaster . 
Although it 's unclear how much exposure the London market will face , U.K. underwriters traditionally have a large reinsurance exposure to U.S. catastrophe coverage . 
Jack Byrne , chairman of Fireman 's Fund , said this disaster will test the catastrophe reinsurance market , causing these rates to soar . 
The catastrophe losses sustained by insurers this year will probably be the worst on an inflation-adjusted basis since 1906 -- when another earthquake sparked the Great San Francisco Fire . 
Orin Kramer , an insurance consultant in New York , estimates that the 1906 San Francisco destruction , on an inflation-adjusted basis , included insured losses of $ 5.8 billion . 
He is estimating this week 's disaster will generate insured losses of $ 2 billion to $ 4 billion , following about $ 4 billion in costs to insurers from Hurricane Hugo . 
Silicon Graphics Inc. 's first-quarter profit rose sharply to $ 5.2 million , or 28 cents a share , from $ 1 million , or six cents a share , a year ago . 
The maker of computer workstations said a surge of government orders contributed to the increase . 
Revenue rose 95 % to $ 86.4 million from $ 44.3 million the year earlier . 
In national over-the-counter trading , the company closed yesterday at $ 23.25 a share , down 25 cents . 
Hunter Environmental Services Inc. said it reached a preliminary accord on the sale of its environmental consulting and services business for about $ 40 million and assumption of related debt . 
The buyer was n't identified . 
The company said it also is making progress in negotiating the buy-out of its design division by management . 
In addition , Hunter said it will use proceeds from a private placement of $ 8 million of preferred shares to purchase an interest in a start-up company to underwrite environmental impairment insurance . 
Hunter wants to concentrate its resources on the insurance business and on a project to store hazardous wastes in salt domes . 
Jaguar PLC 's chairman said he hopes to reach a friendly pact with General Motors Corp. within a month that may involve the British luxury-car maker 's producing a cheaper executive model . 
Sir John Egan told reporters at London 's Motorfair yesterday he `` would be disappointed if we could n't do { the deal } within a month . '' 
He said the tie-up would mean Jaguar could `` develop cars down range { in price } from where we are '' by offering access to GM 's high-volume parts production . 
Besides creating joint manufacturing ventures , the accord is expected to give GM about a 15 % stake that eventually would rise to about 30 % . 
Jaguar figures a friendly alliance with GM will fend off unwelcome advances from Ford Motor Co . 
But Ford , Jaguar 's biggest shareholder since lifting its stake to 10.4 % this week , is pressing harder for talks with Sir John . 
`` We 're getting to the point where we are going to have to meet '' with him , one Ford official said yesterday . 
Ford probably will renew its request for such a meeting soon , he added . 
Sir John has spurned Ford 's advances since the U.S. auto giant launched a surprise bid for as much as 15 % of Jaguar last month . 
Ford has signaled it might acquire a majority interest later . 
`` I 'm not obligated to sit down and talk to anybody , '' the Jaguar chairman asserted yesterday . 
He did n't rule out negotiations with Ford , however . 
The fiercely proud but financially strapped British company prefers to remain independent and publicly held , despite Ford 's promise of access to cash and technological know-how . 
Sir John noted that GM , a longtime Jaguar supplier , agrees `` we should remain an independent company . '' 
He said Jaguar started negotiating with GM and several other car makers over a year ago , but the rest `` dropped by the wayside ever since the share price went above # 4 ( $ 6.30 ) a share . '' 
Jaguar shares stood at 405 pence before Ford 's initial announcement , but the subsequent takeover frenzy has driven them up . 
The stock traded late yesterday on London 's stock exchange at 673 pence , up 19 pence . 
Developing an executive-model range would mark a major departure for Britain 's leading luxury-car maker . 
A typical British executive car is mass produced and smaller than a luxury car . 
It generally fetches no more than # 25,000 ( $ 39,400 ) -- roughly # 16,000 less than the highest-priced Jaguars , which are all known for their hand-crafted leather work . 
`` We have designs for such { executive } cars , but have never been able to develop them , '' Sir John said . 
GM 's help would `` make it possible { for Jaguar } to build a wider range of cars . '' 
An executive model would significantly boost Jaguar 's yearly output of 50,000 cars . 
`` You are talking about a couple hundred thousand a year , '' said Bob Barber , an auto-industry analyst at U.K. brokerage James Capel & Co . 
A pact with GM may emerge in as little as two weeks , according to sources close to the talks . 
The deal would require approval by a majority of Jaguar shareholders . 
`` We have to make it attractive enough that { holders } would accept it , '' Sir John said . 
That may be difficult , the Jaguar chairman acknowledged , `` when you have somebody else breathing down your neck . 
'' Ford probably would try to kill the proposal by enlisting support from U.S. takeover-stock speculators and holding out the carrot of a larger bid later , said Stephen Reitman , European auto analyst at London brokers UBS Phillips & Drew . 
Ford ca n't make a full-fledged bid for Jaguar until U.K. government restrictions expire . 
The anti-takeover measure prevents any outside investor from buying more than 15 % of Jaguar shares without permission until Dec. 31 , 1990 . 
But with its 10.4 % stake , Ford can convene a special Jaguar shareholders ' meeting and urge them to drop the restrictions prematurely . 
`` It 's a very valuable weapon in their armory , '' which could enable Ford to bid sooner for Jaguar , observed Mr. Barber of James Capel . 
Otherwise , Jaguar may have to tolerate the two U.S. auto giants each owning a 15 % stake for more than a year . 
`` It would be difficult to see how a car company can be owned by a collective , '' Sir John said . 
`` It has never been done before , but there 's always a first . 
Although two Baby Bells showed strong growth in access lines , usage and unregulated business revenue , one reported a modest gain in third-quarter net while the other posted a small drop . 
Ameritech Corp. 's earnings increased 2.8 % , after strong revenue gains were offset somewhat by refunds and rate reductions imposed by regulators in its Midwest territory . 
BellSouth Corp. 's third-quarter earnings dropped 3.8 % as a result of debt refinancing , the recent acquisition of a cellular and paging property and rate reductions in its Southeast territory . 
BellSouth 
At BellSouth , based in Atlanta , customer access lines grew by 162,000 , or 3.5 % , during the 12-month period ended Sept . 
For the third quarter , total operating revenue grew 2.6 % to $ 3.55 billion from $ 3.46 billion . 
Total operating expenses increased 3.5 % to $ 2.78 billion from $ 2.69 billion . 
Overall access minutes of use increased 10.3 % and toll messages jumped 5.2 % . 
BellSouth Chairman and Chief Executive Officer John L. Clendenin said three factors accounted for the drop in third-quarter earnings . 
The refinancing of $ 481 million in long-term debt reduced net income by $ 22 million , or five cents a share , but in the long run will save more than $ 250 million in interest costs . 
The company previously said that the recent acquisition of Mobile Communications Corp. of America would dilute 1989 earnings by about 3 % . 
In addition , earnings were reduced by rate reductions in Florida , Kentucky , Alabama , Tennessee and Louisiana . 
Ameritech 
At Ameritech , based in Chicago , customer access lines increased by 402,000 , or 2.6 % , and cellular mobile lines increased by 80,000 , or 62.3 % , for the 12-month period ended Sept. 30 . 
For the third quarter , revenue increased 1.9 % to $ 2.55 billion from $ 2.51 billion . 
Operating expenses increased 2.6 % to $ 2.04 billion , including one-time pretax charges of $ 40 million for labor contract signing bonuses . 
Local service revenue increased 3.5 % and directory and unregulated business revenue jumped 9.5 % . 
But network access revenue dropped 4 % and toll revenue dropped 1.4 % . 
a - reflects 2-for-1 stock split effective Dec. 30 , 1988 . 
b - reflects extraordinary loss of five cents a share for early debt retirement . 
c - reflects extraordinary loss of five cents a share and extraordinary gain of 14 cents a share from cumulative effect of accounting change . 
The Wall Street Journal `` American Way of Buying '' Survey consists of two separate , door-to-door nationwide polls conducted for the Journal by Peter D. Hart Research Associates and the Roper Organization . 
The two surveys , which asked different questions , were conducted using national random probability samples . 
The poll conducted by Peter D. Hart Research Associates interviewed 2,064 adults age 18 and older from June 15 to June 30 , 1989 . 
The poll conducted by the Roper Organization interviewed 2,002 adults age 18 and older from July 7 to July 15 , 1989 . 
Responses were weighted on the basis of age and gender to conform with U.S. Census data . 
For each poll , the odds are 19 out of 20 that if pollsters had sought to survey every household in the U.S. using the same questionnaire , the findings would differ from these poll results by no more than 2 1\/2 percentage points in either direction . 
The margin of error for subgroups -- for example , married women with children at home -- would be larger . 
In addition , in any survey , there is always the chance that other factors such as question wording could introduce errors into the findings . 
Program traders were buying and selling at full steam Monday , the first trading session after the stock market 's 190.58-point plunge Friday . 
They accounted for a hefty 16 % of New York Stock Exchange volume Monday , the fourth busiest session ever . 
On Friday , 13 % of volume was in computer-guided program trades . 
In August , by contrast , program trading averaged 10.3 % of daily Big Board turnover . 
Program traders were publicly castigated following the 508-point crash Oct. 19 , 1987 , and a number of brokerage firms pulled back from using this strategy for a while . 
But as the outcry faded by the spring of 1988 , they resumed . 
Some observers thought that after Friday 's sharp drop , the firms would rein in their program traders to avoid stoking more controversy . 
But the statistics released yesterday show the firms did nothing of the sort . 
One reason , they said , was that the official reports on the 1987 crash exonerated program trading as a cause . 
Stock-index arbitrage is the most controversial form of program trading because it accelerates market moves , if not actually causing them . 
In it , traders buy or sell stocks and offset those positions in stock-index futures contracts to profit from fleeting price discrepancies . 
Under the exchange 's definitions , program trading also describes a number of other strategies that , in the opinion of some traders , do n't cause big swings in the market . 
The Big Board 's disclosure of program trading activity on these two days was unusual . 
Though it collects such data daily , its monthly reports on program trading usually come out about three weeks after each month ends . 
The September figures are due to be released this week . 
The Big Board declined to name the Wall Street firms involved in the activity Friday and Monday , or the type of strategies used . 
But traders on the exchange floor , who can observe the computer-guided trading activity on monitor screens , said most of the top program-trading firms were active both days . 
Through August , the top five program trading firms in volume were Morgan Stanley & Co. , Kidder , Peabody & Co. , Merrill Lynch & Co. , PaineWebber Group Inc. and Salomon Brothers Inc . 
Though brokerage officials defended their use of program trading , one sign of what an issue it remains was that few executives would comment on the record . 
Besides reciting the pardon for program trading contained in the Brady Commission report , they said stock-index arbitrage was actually needed Monday to restore the markets ' equilibrium . 
On Friday , the stock-index futures market was unhinged from the stock market when the Chicago Mercantile Exchange halted trading in Standard & Poor 's 500 futures contract -- a `` circuit breaker '' procedure instituted after the 1987 crash and implemented for the first time . 
Futures trading resumed a half-hour later , but the session ended shortly thereafter , leaving the stock market set up for more sell programs , traders said . 
By Monday morning , they said , stock-index arbitrage sell programs helped re-establish the link between stocks and futures . 
But stunning volatility was produced in the process . 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged a breathtaking 63.52 points in the first 40 minutes of trading Monday as stock-index arbitrage sell programs kicked in . 
At about 10:10 a.m. EDT , the market abruptly turned upward on stock-index arbitrage buy programs . 
By day 's end , the Dow industrials had rebounded 88.12 points , or nearly half of Friday 's drop . 
FREDERICK 'S OF HOLLYWOOD Inc. , Los Angeles , said its board voted a 50 % increase in the specialty boutique-store operator 's semiannual dividend , to five cents a common share . 
The dividend is payable Dec. 15 to stock of record Nov. 15 . 
Valley National Corp. reported a third-quarter net loss of $ 72.2 million , or $ 3.65 a share , and suspended its quarterly dividend because of potential losses on its Arizona real estate holdings . 
The Phoenix-based holding company for Arizona 's largest bank said it added $ 121 million to its allowance for losses on loans and for real estate owned . 
The company earned $ 18.7 million , or 95 cents a share , a year earlier . 
For the nine months , Valley National posted a net loss of $ 136.4 million , or $ 6.90 a share . 
It had profit of $ 48.6 million , or $ 2.46 a share , in the 1988 period . 
Valley National had been paying a quarterly dividend of 36 cents a share . 
`` The Arizona real estate market continues to be depressed , and there is still uncertainty as to when values will recover , '' James P. Simmons , chairman , said . 
The decision to increase the loan-loss reserve and suspend the dividend is `` both prudent and in the best long-term interest of the shareholders , '' he said . 
Valley National said it made the decision on the basis of an `` overall assessment of the marketplace '' and the condition of its loan portfolio and after reviewing it with federal regulators . 
The addition to reserves comes on top of a provision of $ 199.7 million that was announced in June . 
In July , Moody 's downgraded $ 400 million of the company 's debt , saying the bank holding company had n't taken adequate write-offs against potential losses on real estate loans despite its second-quarter write-down . 
Richard M. Greenwood , Valley National 's executive vice president , said then that the company believed the write-downs were `` adequate '' and did n't plan to increase its reserves again . 
Bruce Hoyt , a banking analyst with Boettcher & Co. , a Denver brokerage firm , said Valley National `` is n't out of the woods yet . '' 
The key will be whether Arizona real estate turns around or at least stabilizes , he said . 
`` They 've stepped up to the plate to take the write-downs , but when markets head down , a company is always exposed to further negative surprises , '' Mr. Hoyt said . 
Valley National closed yesterday at $ 24.25 a share , down $ 1 , in national over-the-counter trading . 
Two years of coddling , down the drain . 
That 's the way a lot of brokers feel today on the second anniversary of the 1987 stock-market crash . 
Ever since that fearful Black Monday , they 've been tirelessly wooing wary individual investors -- trying to convince them that Oct. 19 , 1987 , was a fluke and that the stock market really is a safe place for average Americans to put their hard-earned dollars . 
And until last Friday , it seemed those efforts were starting to pay off . 
`` Some of those folks were coming back , '' says Leslie Quick Jr. , chairman , of discount brokers Quick & Reilly Group Inc . 
`` We had heard from people who had n't been active '' for a long time . 
Then came the frightening 190-point plunge in the Dow Jones Industrial Average and a new wave of stock-market volatility . 
All of a sudden , it was back to square one . 
`` It 's going to set things back for a period , because it reinforces the concern of volatility , '' says Jeffrey B. Lane , president of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc . 
`` I think it will shake confidence one more time , and a lot of this business is based on client confidence . '' 
Brokers around the country say the reaction from individual investors this week has been almost eerie . 
Customers and potential customers are suddenly complaining about the stock market in the exact way they did in post-crash 1987 . 
`` The kinds of questions you had before have resurfaced , '' says Raymond A. `` Chip '' Mason , chairman of regional brokerage firm Legg Mason Inc. , Baltimore . 
`` I can just tell the questions are right back where they were : ` What 's going on ? , ' ` Ca n't anything be done about program trading ? , ' ` Does n't the exchange understand ? , ' ` Where is the SEC on this ? ' '' 
Mr. Mason says he 's convinced the public still wants to invest in common stocks , even though they believe the deck is stacked against them . 
But `` these wide swings scare them to death . '' 
All of this is bad news for the big brokerage firms such as Shearson and Merrill Lynch & Co. that have big `` retail , '' or individual-investor , businesses . 
After expanding rapidly during the bull-market years up to the 1987 crash , retail brokerage operations these days are getting barely enough business to pay the overhead . 
True , the amount of money investors are willing to entrust to their brokers has been growing lately . 
But those dollars have been going into such `` safe '' products as money market funds , which do n't generate much in the way of commissions for the brokerage firms . 
At discount brokerage Charles Schwab & Co. , such `` cash-equivalent '' investments recently accounted for a record $ 8 billion of the firm 's $ 25 billion of client 's assets . 
The brokers ' hope has been that they could soon coax investors into shifting some of their hoard into the stock market . 
And before last Friday , they were actually making modest progress . 
A slightly higher percentage of New York Stock Exchange volume has been attributed to retail investors in recent months compared with post-crash 1988 , according to Securities Industry Association data . 
In 1987 , an average 19.7 % of Big Board volume was retail business , with the monthly level never more than 21.4 % . 
The retail participation dropped to an average 18.2 % in 1988 , and shriveled to barely 14 % some months during the year . 
Yet in 1989 , retail participation has been more than 20 % in every month , and was 23.5 % in August , the latest month for which figures are available . 
Jeffrey Schaefer , the SIA 's research director , says that all of his group 's retail-volume statistics could be overstated by as much as five percentage points because corporate buy-backs are sometimes inadvertently included in Big Board data . 
But there did seem to be a retail activity pickup . 
But `` Friday did n't help things , '' says Mr. Schaefer . 
With the gyrations of recent days , says Hugo Quackenbush , senior vice president at Charles Schwab , many small investors are absolutely convinced that `` they should n't play in the stock market . '' 
Joseph Grano , president of retail sales and marketing at PaineWebber Group Inc. , still thinks that individual investors will eventually go back into the stock market . 
Investors will develop `` thicker skins , '' and their confidence will return , he says . 
Friday 's plunge , he is telling PaineWebber brokers , was nothing more than a `` tremendous reaction to leveraged buy-out stocks . '' 
Meanwhile , PaineWebber remains among the leaders in efforts to simply persuade investors to keep giving Wall Street their money . 
`` It 's more of an important issue to keep control of those assets , rather than push the investor to move into ( specific ) products such as equities , '' Mr. Grano says . 
`` The equity decision will come when the client is ready and when there 's a semblance of confidence . '' 
It could be a long wait , say some industry observers . 
`` Some investors will tiptoe back in , '' says Richard Ross , a market research director for Elrick & Lavidge in Chicago . 
`` Then there 'll be another swing . 
Given enough of these , this will drive everyone out except the most hardy , '' he adds . 
Mr. Ross , who has been studying retail investors ' perception of risks in the brokerage industry , said a market plunge like Friday 's `` shatters investors ' confidence in their ability to make any judgments on the market . '' 
The long-term outlook for the retail brokerage business is `` miserable , '' Mr. Ross declares . 
The following were among yesterday 's offerings and pricings in the U.S. and non-U.S. capital markets , with terms and syndicate manager , as compiled by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report : 
Washington , D.C. -- 
$ 200 million of general obligation tax revenue anticipation notes , Series 1990 , due Sept. 28 , 1990 . 
About $ 190 million were offered through Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc . 
Shearson is offering the notes as 6 3\/4 % securities priced to yield 6.15 % . 
J.P. Morgan Securities Inc. is offering the remaining $ 10 million of notes . 
The notes are rated MIG-1 by Moody 's Investors Service Inc . 
Standard & Poor 's Corp. has them under review . 
Federal National Mortgage Association -- 
$ 400 million of Remic mortgage securities being offered in 16 classes by Bear , Stearns & Co . 
The offering , Series 1989-83 , is backed by Fannie Mae 9 % securities . 
The offering used at-market pricing . 
Separately , Fannie Mae issued $ 400 million of Remic mortgage securities in 12 classes through First Boston Corp . 
The offering , Series 1989-84 , is backed by Fannie Mae 9 % securities . 
Pricing details were n't available . 
The two offerings bring Fannie Mae 's 1989 Remic issuance to $ 31 billion and its total volume to $ 43.3 billion since the program began in April 1987 . 
Societa per Azioni Finanziaria Industria Manaifatturiera ( Italy ) -- 
$ 150 million of 9 % depository receipts due Nov. 27 , 1994 , priced at 101.60 to yield 9.07 % less fees , via Bankers Trust International Ltd . 
Fees 1 7\/8 . 
Mitsubishi Corp . Finance ( Japanese parent ) -- 
$ 100 million of 8 5\/8 % bonds due Nov. 1 , 1993 priced at 101 1\/4 to yield 8.74 % annually less full fees , via Yamaichi International ( Europe ) Ltd . 
Fees 1 5\/8 . 
Indian Oil Corp . ( India ) -- 
$ 200 million of floating-rate notes due November 1994 , paying six-month London interbank offered rate plus 3\/16 point and priced at par via Credit Suisse First Boston Ltd . 
Guaranteed by India . 
Fees 0.36 . 
Notes offered at a fixed level of 99.75 . 
National Westminster Bank PLC ( U.K. ) -- 
# 200 million of undated variable-rate notes priced at par via Merill Lynch International Ltd . 
Initial interest rate set at 0.375 point over three-month Libor . 
Subsequent margins set by agreement between NatWest and Merrill . 
If no margin agreed , there is a fallback rate of Libor plus 0.75 point in years one to 15 , and Libor plus 1.25 point thereafter . 
Keihin Electric Express Railway Co . ( Japan ) -- 
$ 150 million of bonds due Nov. 9 , 1993 , with equity-purchase warrants , indicating a 4 % coupon at par via Yamaichi International ( Europe ) Ltd . 
Each $ 5,000 bond carries one warrant , exercisable from Dec. 1 , 1989 , through Nov. 2 , 1993 , to buy company shares at an expected premium of 2 1\/2 % to the closing share price when terms are fixed Oct. 24 . 
Seiren Co . ( Japan ) -- 
110 million Swiss francs of privately placed convertible notes due March 31 , 1994 , with an indicated 0.25 % coupon at par , via Bank Leu Ltd . 
Put option on March 31 , 1992 , at an indicated 109 to yield 3.865 % . 
Callable on March 31 , 1992 , at 109 , also beginning Sept. 30 , 1992 , from 101 1\/2 and declining half a point semiannually to par . 
Each 50,000 Swiss franc note is convertible from Nov. 20 , 1989 , to March 17 , 1994 , at an indicated 5 % premium over the closing share price Oct. 25 , when terms are scheduled to be fixed . 
N. Nomura & Co . ( Japan ) -- 
50 million Swiss francs of privately placed convertible notes due March 31 , 1994 , with an indicated 0.5 % coupon at par , via Bank Julius Baer . 
Put option on March 31 , 1992 , at an indicated 108 1\/4 to yield 3.846 % . 
Each 50,000 Swiss franc note is convertible from Nov. 20 , 1989 , to March 17 , 1994 , at a 5 % premium over the closing share price Oct. 21 , when terms are scheduled to be fixed . 
Aegon N.V . ( Netherlands ) -- 
250 million Dutch guilders of 7 3\/4 % bonds due Nov. 15 , 1999 , priced at 101 1\/4 to yield 7.57 % at issue price and 7.86 % less full fees , via AMRO Bank . 
Fees 2 . 
Continental Airlines -- 
a four-part , $ 71 million issue of secured equipment certificates priced through Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc . 
The size of the issue was decreased from an originally planned $ 95.2 million . 
In addition , a planned two-part offering of $ 58 million in unsecured notes was n't offered . 
The first part , consisting of $ 2.5 million of 11 1\/4 % secured equipment certificates due June 15 , 1990 , was priced at 98.481 with a yield to maturity of 13.75 % . 
The second part , consisting of $ 28 million of 11 3\/4 % secured equipment certificates due June 15 , 1995 , was priced at 87.026 with a yield to maturity of 15.25 % . 
The third part , consisting of $ 18.5 million of 12 1\/8 % secured equipment certificates due April 15 , 1996 , was priced at 85.60 with a yield to maturity of 15.75 % . 
The fourth part , consisting of $ 22 million of 12 1\/2 % secured equipment certificates due April 15 , 1999 , was priced at 85.339 with a yield to maturity of 15.50 % . 
The issue was rated single-B-2 by Moody 's and single-B by S&P . 
All parts of the issue are callable at any time at par . 
Continental Airlines is a unit of Texas Air Corp . 
John V. Holmes , an investment-newsletter publisher , and three venture-capital firms he organized were enjoined from violating the registration provisions of the securities laws governing investment companies . 
As part of an agreement that settled charges brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission , a receiver was also appointed for the three venture-capital firms . 
Mr. Holmes was the subject of a page one profile in The Wall Street Journal in 1984 , after the SEC questioned him about ties between him and companies he touted in a newsletter . 
In 1986 , in another consent agreement with the SEC , Mr. Holmes was enjoined from violating the stock-registration and anti-fraud provisions of the securities laws . 
Without any admission or denial of guilt by Mr. Holmes , that agreement settled SEC charges that Mr. Holmes sold unregistered securities and misled investors . 
In charges filed last week in federal district court in Charlotte , N.C. , the SEC alleged that Venture Capitalists Inc. , Venture Finance Corp. and New Ventures Fund Inc. , all of Charlotte , failed repeatedly to file proper documents . 
The SEC also charged that Mr. Holmes acted as an officer or director of New Ventures , in violation of his previous consent agreement . 
`` Some companies were delinquent in filings and other actions , all of which cost money , '' Mr. Holmes said . 
Two of Mr. Holmes 's business associates who worked for Venture Capitalists , Kimberly Ann Smith and Frederick Byrum , also consented to being enjoined from violations of registration provisions of the securities laws . 
Ms. Smith also agreed to a permanent injunction barring her from acting as an officer , director or investment adviser of any mutual fund , unit investment trust or face-amount certificate company . 
Mr. Byrum and Ms. Smith could n't be reached for comment . 
In consenting to the injunctions , none of the individuals or companies admitted or denied the allegations . 
Senate Republicans have settled on a proposal that would cut the capital-gains tax for individuals and corporations . 
At the same time , a small group of Senate Democrats are working on a similar plan and may introduce it soon . 
Sen. Bob Packwood ( R. , Ore. ) , the lead sponsor of the GOP proposal , said he intends to unveil the plan today and to offer it as an amendment to whatever legislation comes along , particularly this month 's bill to raise the federal borrowing limit . 
He gave 10-to-1 odds that a capital-gains tax cut of some sort would be approved this year , though it probably wo n't be included in the pending deficit-reduction bill . 
He added that he expects to talk to the Democrats who also wanted to cut the gains tax about drafting a joint proposal . 
For individuals , the Packwood plan would exclude from income 5 % of the gain from the sale of a capital asset held for more than one year . 
The exclusion would rise five percentage points for each year the asset was held until it reached a maximum of 35 % . 
The exclusion would apply to assets sold after Oct. 1 , 1989 . 
As an alternative , he said , taxpayers could chose to reduce their gains by an inflation index . 
For corporations , the top tax rate on the sale of assets held for more than three years would be cut to 33 % from the current top rate of 34 % . 
That rate would gradually decline to as little as 29 % for corporate assets held for 15 years . 
The Packwood plan would also include a proposal , designed by Sen. William Roth ( R. , Del. ) , that would expand and alter the deduction for individual retirement accounts . 
The Roth plan would create a new , non-deductible IRA from which money could be withdrawn tax-free not only for retirement , but also for the purchase of a first home and to pay education and medical expenses . 
Current IRAs could be rolled over into the new IRAs but would be subject to tax . 
For their part , the group of Democrats are working on a plan that , like the Packwood proposal , would grant larger exclusions to assets the longer they were held by individuals and companies . 
Newly acquired assets would get a bigger break than those currently held . 
An extra exclusion would be given to long-held stock in small and medium-size corporations just starting up . 
No one in the Senate is considering the capital-gains plan passed by the House . 
That plan would provide a 30 % exclusion to assets sold over a 2 1 / 2-year period ending Dec. 31 , 1991 . 
After then , the House measure would boost the tax rate to 28 % and exclude from tax the gain attributable to inflation . 
Senators are focusing on making a capital-gains differential permanent . 
Separately , Chairman Dan Rostenkowski ( D. , Ill . ) of the House Ways and Means Committee said he did n't want the capital-gains tax cut or any other amendments attached to the pending bill raising the federal borrowing limit . 
The current debt limit expires Oct. 31 . 
He also urged House and Senate negotiators to rid the deficit-reduction bill of all provisions that increase the budget deficit , including the House-passed capital-gains provision . 
From a helicopter a thousand feet above Oakland after the second-deadliest earthquake in U.S. history , a scene of devastation emerges : a freeway crumbled into a concrete sandwich , hoses pumping water into once-fashionable apartments , abandoned autos . 
But this quake was n't the big one , the replay of 1906 that has been feared for so many years . 
Despite the tragic loss of more than 270 lives , and damage estimated in the billions , most businesses and their plants and offices in the Bay area were n't greatly affected . 
The economic life of the region is expected to revive in a day or two , although some transportation problems may last weeks or months . 
A main factor mitigating more widespread damage was the location of the quake 's epicenter -- 20 miles from the heart of the Silicon Valley and more than 50 miles from downtown San Francisco and Oakland . 
Also , the region 's insistence on strict building codes helped prevent wider damage . 
The tremendous energy of the quake was dissipated by the distance , so that most parts of the valley and the major cities suffered largely cosmetic damage -- broken windows , falling brick and cornices , buckled asphalt or sidewalks . 
Of course , the quake was the worst since the emergence of the computer era turned Silicon Valley into the nation 's capital of high technology . 
Like other major American cities , the San Francisco -- Oakland area owes its current prosperity more to its infrastructure of fiber-optic cables linking thousands of computer terminals and telephones than to its location astride one of the world 's great natural harbors . 
When the tremors struck , the region 's largely unseen high-tech fabric held up surprisingly well despite the devastation visible from the air . 
Michael L. Bandler , vice president for network technology at Pacific Bell Telephone Co. , says nearly all the network 's computer switches , which move thousands of calls a minute from one location to another , changed to battery power when the city lost power . 
The battery packs have enough power for only three hours , but that gave emergency crews time to turn on an emergency system that runs primarily on diesel fuel . 
Of some 160 switches in Pacific Bell 's network , only four went down . 
One of those was in Hollister , Calif. , near the earthquake 's epicenter . 
Few telephone lines snapped . 
That 's because the widely used fiber-optic cable has been installed underground with 25 extra feet of cable between junction points . 
The slack absorbs the pulling strain generated by an earthquake . 
Nevertheless , phone service was sporadic ; many computer terminals remained dark , and by late yesterday a third of San Francisco remained without power . 
Business in the nation 's fourth-largest metropolitan region was nearly paralyzed ; an estimated one million members of the work force stayed at home . 
The economic dislocation was as abrupt as the earthquake itself , as virtually all businesses shut down . 
The $ 125-billion-a-year Bay area economy represents one-fourth of the economy of the nation 's most populous state and accounts for 2 % to 3 % of the nation 's total output of goods and services , according to the Center for Continuing Study of the California Economy in Palo Alto . 
In high-tech , the Bay area accounts for 15 % to 20 % of the U.S. computer-related industry . 
`` This has been a major disruption for the Bay area economy , '' says Pauline Sweezey , the chief economist at the California Department of Finance . 
`` Obviously , things are going to have to go on hold for many companies . '' 
The damage to the Bay area 's roadways could cause significant economic hardship . 
A quarter of a million people cross the Bay Bridge every day , far more than the 100,000 that use the Bay Area Rapid Transit system ( BART ) -- which was working but was n't stopping in the city 's Financial District yesterday afternoon because electricity was shut off and the area was being checked for gas leaks . 
California state transportation officials interviewed by telephone say they nevertheless do n't expect serious problems for commerce in and out of the Bay area . 
All major roadways except Interstate 880 , known as the Nimitz Freeway , and the Bay Bridge were open by 1 p.m. yesterday . 
Officials expect difficulty routing traffic through downtown San Francisco . 
The earthquake caused many streets to buckle and crack , making them impassible . 
Other roads were obstructed by collapsed buildings and damaged water and power lines , an emergency relief spokesman says . 
San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos estimated the damage to his city alone at $ 2 billion . 
But many predicted that the commercial disruption would be short-lived . 
Of the scores of companies contacted by this newspaper , few reported any damage that they did n't expect to have remedied within a day or two . 
It is possible , of course , that some of the most seriously damaged companies could n't be reached , particularly in areas nearest the epicenter . 
Typical , perhaps , was the situation at New United Motor Manufacturing Inc. , the General Motors Corp.-Toyota joint-venture auto plant in Fremont , about 35 miles south of Oakland . 
Ten of the plant 's workers were injured when the quake hit about a half-hour into the afternoon shift ; seven were hospitalized . 
Metal racks on the plant floor fell over , and water mains ruptured , a spokeswoman says . 
The plant was evacuated and workers sent home . 
But the plant was able to resume limited production of its Toyota Corollas and Geo Prizms by 6 a.m. yesterday , and absenteeism was only 7 % of the work force , about twice normal . 
Computer maker Hewlett-Packard Co. , based in Palo Alto , says one of its buildings sustained severe damage when it was knocked off its foundation . 
Other buildings had broken glass , dangling light fixtures and broken pipes , a spokesperson says , estimating the cost of reconstruction `` in the millions . '' 
Most banks were closed but were expected to reopen today with few problems anticipated . 
At the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco , Vice President Robert Fienberg says operations were `` steaming along as usual '' yesterday afternoon . 
` When the quake hit , we turned on our emergency generator and brought our computers up , '' he says . 
The Fed serves as a middleman for banks , taking checks from one bank and sending them to another , an operation that it handled smoothly Tuesday night after the quake . 
`` The volume we received from the banks was a lot lower than usual , '' he says . 
A disaster-contingency plan in which the Los Angeles Fed would come to San Francisco 's aid was n't needed , he adds . 
Most of the telephone problems in the immediate aftermath stemmed from congestion . 
The telephone network simply could n't handle the large number of people seeking to make a call at the same time . 
The volume resulted in dial-tone delays that were as short as 15 seconds and as long as five minutes . 
Mr. Bandler puts traffic volume at 10 to 50 times normal . 
American Telephone & Telegraph Co. , MCI Communications Inc. and United Telecommunications ' U S Sprint unit were blocking phone calls into the Bay area to alleviate congestion . 
The companies block traffic much as highway on-ramps are blocked when traffic backs up . 
William E. Downing , Pacific Bell 's vice president of customer services for the Bay area , says most long-distance companies were blocking about 50 % of all calls . 
Pacific Telesis says its Pacific Bell unit also was blocking about 50 % of its calls locally . 
Ironically , the long-term effect of the earthquake may be to bolster the Bay area 's economic fortunes and , indeed , the nation 's gross national product . 
It may also lead to new safeguards in major construction projects such as double-deck highways . 
`` It would in the near-term give a boost to the San Francisco economy because there will be an influx of people to help , '' says Beth Burnham Mace , a regional economist at DRI / McGraw Hill , a Lexington , Mass. , forecasting firm . 
The construction industry is sure to feel increased demand . 
`` There will be a big influx of federal dollars and gains in state , federal and local employment , '' Ms. Mace says . 
Adds Stacy Kotman , an economist at Georgia State University , `` There 's nothing positive about an earthquake , but it will probably generate more construction activity . '' 
Wall Street reacted swiftly yesterday to the disaster by bidding up stocks of construction and related companies . 
Shares of Lone Star Industries Inc. , a cement maker , rose sharply in anticipation of stepped-up demand . 
In Greenwich , Conn. , Lone Star spokesman Michael London says , `` Obviously with an earthquake of this size , there are likely to be construction projects that would n't otherwise have been anticipated . 
But any increase is n't likely to be any kind of a surge . 
It 's something likely to be spread out over a long period of time . 
There will be a lot of repair work that wo n't require the quantities of cement or concrete that new constructon would . '' 
Lone Star 's San Francisco facilities were n't damaged in the quake . 
The earthquake is likely to reduce GNP negligibly in the near term and then could raise it a bit as rebuilding begins . 
The first effects are , of course , negative as work is disrupted and people lose income and cut spending . 
Corporate profits may also dip initially . 
Many of the lost tourism dollars wo n't be recovered ; many trips delayed never take place . 
Subsequently , however , the ill effects are likely to be offset , at least in economic terms , as construction activity begins . 
Because of the way the government keeps its books , the damage to the Bay Bridge , however costly , wo n't be counted as a minus . 
The money spent on repairs will be counted as a plus . 
`` It 's very difficult to model the long-term impact of this , '' says Andrew Goldberg , who studies the public-policy and crisis-management aspects of earthquakes at the Center for Strategic International Studies in Washington , D.C . 
`` You certainly can say it 's going to be extremely severe . 
We really are talking about shutting down a major American city for a number of days , maybe for a few weeks . '' 
Mr. Goldberg says the cost of the earthquake will definitely top $ 1 billion and could reach $ 4 billion . 
He cautions that early damage estimates are often low ; the damage totals in Hurricane Hugo increased tenfold as more information was received . 
The earthquake damage , of course , would have been far greater if the epicenter had been in downtown San Francisco . 
A direct hit on a major city , Mr. Goldberg figures , would cause $ 20 billion to $ 40 billion of damage . 
Experts caution that it is far too soon for reliable estimates of the quake 's total damage , but it 's clear that insurers are likely to pay out enormous sums . 
Jack Byrne , the chairman of Fireman 's Fund Corp. , which is based in Novato , Calif. , estimates insured losses resulting the earthquake could total $ 2 billion . 
The impact on the insurance industry `` will be big and harsh , but less than { Hurricane } Hugo , '' says Mr. Byrne , who toured the Bay area by car yesterday afternoon to get a sense of the company 's exposure to the earthquake . 
Mr. Byrne says Fireman 's Fund will probably pay hundreds of millions in primary claims , but , after taxes and use of its reinsurance lines , the company 's fourthquarter charge against earnings should n't top $ 50 million . 
The company was able to assess its damage liability quickly because it has computerized maps of Northern California showing the exact locations of all the property it insures . 
Fireman 's Fund had claims adjusters on the streets of San Francisco right after sunrise yesterday and was paying as many claims as it could right on the spot . 
Fireman 's Fund insures 37,300 homes and autos and 35,000 businesses in the Bay area . 
In addition to paying for earthquake and fire damage , the insurer must cover worker-compensation claims and also losses due to businesses being shut down by lack of power or phone service . 
But many Californians may not have adequate insurance coverage to pay for damages to their property . 
The Independent Insurance Agents of America says fewer than one of every five California homeowners has earthquake insurance . 
A somewhat higher percentage of people living in the Bay area have bought the additional insurance protection , but the great majority are n't covered . 
Earthquake insurance typically runs $ 200 or more a year for a small house . 
Whatever the long-term economic effect , the scene from the helicopter above Oakland is one of tragedy . 
Gargantuan sections of a double-decker freeway have been heaved about like plastic building blocks . 
Atop them sit cars and trucks abandoned in a terrifying scramble to safety the day before . 
In areas where the freeway made giant concrete sandwiches of itself lie cars that police say have been flattened into foot-thick slabs . 
On the periphery , rescue workers seem , from the air , to move in slow motion . 
They peck away at the 1 1 / 2-mile section of rubble , searching for more of the 250 people thought to have died here . 
About 20 other deaths were also attributed to the earthquake . 
The heart of the earthquake , 6.9 on the Richter scale , was 50 miles to the south , near Santa Cruz , but its terrible fist struck here on the Nimitz Freeway , a major artery serving the Bay Bridge between Oakland and San Francisco . 
Along the way , the quake toppled a mall in Santa Cruz , knocked down buildings in San Francisco 's fashionable Marina District and sent a wall of bricks crashing on motorists in the city 's Financial District . 
Just a short span across the bay to the west , the quake also showed its mettle : A four-square-block area of the Marina District lies smoldering under a steady stream of seawater being pumped onto rubble to prevent it from blazing anew . 
Many of the buildings , mostly condominiums and apartments , were flattened almost instantly as the underlying soil -- much of it landfill -- was literally turned to ooze by the quake 's intensive shaking , rupturing gas lines . 
Onlookers say three persons died when one of the buildings exploded into a fireball shortly after the quake struck . 
Efforts to fight the blaze were hampered because water mains were severed as well . 
From the air , ribbons of yellow fire hose carry water from the bay to high-pressure nozzles trained on the site . 
As onlookers stand behind barricades , helmeted firemen and building inspectors survey rows of nearby buildings that were twisted from their foundations and seem on the verge of collapse . 
In the Marina District , residents spent yesterday assessing damage , cleaning up and trying to find friends and neighbors . 
Evelyn Boccone , 85 years old , has lived in the district most of her life . 
Her parents lost everything in the 1906 earthquake . 
`` Now , we realize what our mothers must have gone through , '' she says . 
`` We always heard about the earthquake , but as children we did n't always listen . 
PRINCE HENRI is the crown prince and hereditary grand duke of Luxembourg . 
An article in the World Business Report of Sept. 22 editions incorrectly referred to his father , Grand Duke Jean , as the crown prince . 
Resolution Funding Corp. plans to sell $ 4.5 billion of 30-year bonds Wednesday in the agency 's first sale of securities . 
The new bonds will be dated Oct. 30 and mature Oct. 15 , 2019 . 
Tenders for the bonds , available in minimum denominations of $ 1,000 , must be received by 1 p.m. EDT Wednesday at Federal Reserve banks . 
Refcorp , created by the thrift-overhaul law enacted in August , will use the proceeds to merge or sell off ailing savings-and-loan institutions . 
Congress authorized $ 50 billion to be borrowed to pay for the thrift bailout . 
Of that amount , $ 20 billion has already been borrowed by the Treasury Department . 
Unless otherwise specified in a particular offer , the bonds wo n't be subject to redemption prior to maturity . 
Interest payments on the bonds will be payable semiannually . 
The bonds are subject to federal taxation in the U.S. , including income taxes . 
At the state and local level , the bonds are subject to surtaxes and estate , inheritance and gift taxes , but exempt from taxation as to principal and interest . 
G.D. Searle & Co. , a Monsanto Co. unit , is launching a program to give consumers more information about its drugs when doctors prescribe them . 
Called Patients in the Know , the program features fact sheets designed to be easy to understand . 
The sheets tell how the medicine works , describe how to use it and list its possible side effects . 
They are designed to be given to patients by their doctors when the medicines are prescribed and include space for the doctor to write special instructions . 
In addition , Searle will give pharmacists brochures on the use of prescription drugs for distribution in their stores . 
Consumer groups have long advocated that drug companies and doctors make more information available to patients . 
`` We believe that every drug that 's marketed to a consumer should have a consumer label , '' said Douglas Teich of the Public Citizen Health Research Group , a Ralph Nader affiliate . 
Dr. Teich said Searle is `` the only company I know that voluntarily '' will make consumer information available . 
According to federal officials and drug-industry studies , nearly half of the 1.6 billion prescriptions filled each year are n't used properly , meaning that money is wasted on some prescriptions and patients are deprived of the benefits of medication . 
`` We think it 's very important to provide as much information as possible on the drugs consumers take , '' said Searle Chairman Sheldon Gilgore . 
Bond prices rambled yesterday as investors kept close watch on the stock market and worried about a wave of new supply . 
Early yesterday , bonds rose as investors rushed to buy Treasury securities on the prospect that stocks would plummet in the aftermath of the massive California earthquake . 
For example , some securities analysts warned that stocks of certain insurance companies , which face massive damage claims , would get hit hard . 
But when the Dow Jones Industrial Average rose instead , bonds drifted lower . 
With stocks not a major focus , `` we 're waiting for the next guiding light , '' said Brian J. Fabbri , chief economist at Midland Montagu Securities Inc . 
`` If the stock market tremors are behind us , then the bond market will go back to looking at the next batch of economic numbers to determine '' where interest rates are heading . 
The Treasury 's benchmark 30-year bond , which jumped 3\/8 point , or about $ 3.75 for each $ 1,000 face amount , during the first hour of trading , ended little changed . 
Interest rates barely budged from Tuesday 's levels . 
Most junk bonds , which have been battered in recent weeks , continued a slow recuperation and ended unchanged to slightly higher . 
But some so-called high-quality junk issues fell as some mutual funds sold their most liquid issues to raise cash . 
RJR Holdings Capital Corp. 's 14.7 % bonds due 2009 fell one point . 
Other RJR issues fell between 1\/2 point and 1 1\/2 point . 
In the latest sign of how difficult it is to place certain junk bonds , Continental Airlines said it was forced to scale back the size of its latest offering . 
Continental , a unit of Texas Air Corp. , slashed the size of its note offering from $ 150 million to $ 71 million . 
The move had been widely expected . 
In the multipart offering , the company sold a portion of secured notes but shelved all the unsecured notes . 
A Continental spokeswoman said the notes may be offered at a later date . 
`` This was not a do-or-die deal , '' she said . 
`` I think this is a market that required some level of security . 
It did not make sense to offer unsecured paper in an unsettling market . '' 
Investors have been speculating for weeks about the market 's ability to place the $ 7 billion to $ 10 billion of new junk bonds scheduled to be sold by year end . 
Supply troubles were also on the minds of Treasury investors yesterday , who worried about the flood of new government securities coming next week . 
`` We 're being bombarded by new Treasury and agency debt offerings , '' said William Sullivan Jr. , director of money-market research at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc . 
`` The market is concerned about its ability to underwrite all this debt at current levels . '' 
In addition to the $ 15.6 billion of Treasury bills to be sold at next week 's regular Monday auction , the government will sell $ 10 billion of new two-year Treasury notes . 
And Resolution Funding Corp. said late yesterday that it will sell $ 4.5 billion of 30-year bonds Wednesday . 
Refcorp is the financing unit of Resolution Trust Corp. , a new government agency created to rescue the nation 's troubled thrifts . 
Its securities have been dubbed `` bailout bonds '' by traders . 
In when-issued trading , the two-year Treasurys had a yield of about 7.88 % . 
In the municipal market , all eyes were on California debt as investors tried to gauge the financial ramifications of Tuesday 's earthquake . 
But traders said the quake had only a minor impact on the trading of California state and local municipal debt . 
`` There are certain bonds traders refer to as ` earthquake ' bonds because the ( issuers ) are on top of the San Andreas fault , '' said Zane Mann , editor of the California Municipal Bond Advisor , a newsletter for investors . 
Since those bonds already pay a slightly higher yield , an extra premium for the earthquake risk , they were n't materially affected . 
But some bond market analysts said that could quickly change if property casualty insurance companies scramble to sell portions of their municipal portfolios to raise cash to pay damage claims . 
`` Insurance companies will foot a substantial amount of the bill to reconstruct San Francisco , '' said Charles Lieberman , chief economist at Manufacturers Hanover Securities Corp . 
He also expects the performance of municipals to lag Treasurys as California is forced to issue new debt over time to repair public facilities . 
A report issued late yesterday by Standard & Poor 's Corp. concluded the quake wo n't cause `` wide-scale credit deterioration '' for issuers and debt issues in the 12-county area of Northern California affected by the quake . 
Treasury Securities 
Treasury bonds ended narrowly mixed in quiet trading . 
The benchmark 30-year bond ended at a price of 100 29\/32 to yield 8.03 % , compared with 100 28\/32 to yield 8.04 % Tuesday . 
The latest 10-year notes were quoted late at a price of 99 26\/32 to yield 8 % , compared with 99 25\/32 to yield 8.01 % . 
Short-term rates were little changed . 
Corporate Issues 
Investment-grade corporate bonds ended 1\/4 point lower . 
The Continental junk bond offering , underwritten by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. , was the only new issue priced yesterday . 
In the four-part offering , the $ 71 million of secured equipment certificates was priced to yield 13.75 % to 15.75 % . 
Municipals 
Municipal bonds ended about 1\/8 to 3\/8 point lower , hurt by the circulation of two `` bid-wanted '' lists totaling $ 655 million . 
Chemical Securities Inc. is acting as agent for the seller . 
Meanwhile , some California issues were down a touch more than the broad market , but traders said there had n't been much investor selling because of the quake . 
But New York City general obligation bonds came under selling pressure . 
Traders said a steady stream of bonds was put up for sale yesterday , pushing yields for longer maturities up 0.05 percentage point . 
Traders said investors were reacting to recent negative news on the city 's finances and are nervous ahead of the Nov. 7 election . 
Washington , D.C. , topped the competitive slate yesterday with a sale of $ 200 million of general obligation tax revenue anticipation notes . 
In late trading , New Jersey Turnpike Authority 's 7.20 % issue of 2018 was off 1\/4 point at 98 bid . 
The yield was 7.35 % , up 0.01 percentage point . 
Mortgage-Backed Securities 
Mortgage securities ended little changed after light dealings . 
There was no appreciable market impact from the California earthquake . 
Dealers said there was some concern that insurance companies might be forced to sell mortgage securities to help pay earthquake-related claims , but no selling materialized . 
The Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. and Federal National Mortgage Association , two dominant issuers of mortgage securities , have a sizable amount of California home loans in their mortgagebacked pools . 
But their potential quake exposure is seen as small given that they require a financial cushion on all the loans they purchase . 
And because Northern California home prices are so high , loans from the region often are too large to be included in Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae pools . 
Meanwhile , Government National Mortgage Association 9 % securities for November delivery ended at 97 29\/32 , unchanged . 
Freddie Mac 9 % securities were at 97 4\/32 , down 1\/32 . 
In derivative markets , Fannie Mae issued two $ 400 million real estate mortgage investment conduits backed by its 9 % securities . 
Foreign Bonds 
British government bonds , or gilts , ended moderately lower as equities there recovered from Tuesday 's drop . 
The Treasury 's 11 3\/4 % bond due 2003\/2007 fell 11\/32 to 111 31\/32 to yield 10.08 % , while the 12 % notes due 1995 were down 7\/32 to 103 22\/32 to yield 11.04 % . 
Traders said today may be an anxious day for the market . 
Several key economic figures are due out and Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson is scheduled to give the annual `` Mansion House '' address to the financial community . 
The chancellor sometimes has used the occasion to announce major economic policy changes . 
Economists do n't expect any such changes in this year 's address , given Mr. Lawson 's apparent reluctance to adjust policy currently . 
Meanwhile , Japanese government bonds retreated in quiet trading , stymied by the dollar 's resiliency . 
Japan 's bellwether 4.6 % bond due 1998 ended on brokers ' screens at 95.75 to yield 5.315 % . 
In West Germany , investors stayed on the sidelines as the bond market searched for direction . 
The government 's 7 % issue due October 1999 fell 0.05 point to 99.90 to yield 7.01 % . 
The Berlin Wall still stands . 
But the man who built it has fallen . 
East Germany yesterday removed Erich Honecker , one of the staunchest holdouts against the reform rumbling through the Communist world , in an effort to win back the confidence of its increasingly rebellious citizens . 
But while it was a move that stunned the East bloc , it hardly ushers in an era of reform -- at least anytime soon . 
For the Politburo replaced Mr. Honecker , who had led East Germany for 18 years and before that headed its security apparatus , with a man cut of the same cloth : Egon Krenz , the most recent internal-security chief and a longtime Honecker protege . 
East Germany , it is clear , is no Poland , where the Communist Party now shares power with the democratically elected Solidarity union . 
Nor is it a Hungary , where yesterday the parliament approved constitutional changes meant to help turn the Communist nation into a multiparty democracy . 
Still , any change in East Germany has enormous implications , for both East and West . 
It raises the long-cherished hopes of many Germans for reunification -- a prospect that almost equally alarms political leaders in Moscow , Washington and Western Europe . 
Mr. Krenz , 52 , was named the new party chief just minutes after the Party 's 163-member Central Committee convened in East Berlin . 
Although the East German news agency ADN claimed Mr. Honecker had asked to be relieved of his duties for `` health reasons , '' West German government sources said the 26-man Politburo had asked for his resignation at a separate meeting late Tuesday . 
( Mr. Honecker was twice hospitalized this summer for a gall bladder ailment and his physical condition has been the subject of intense speculation in the Western media . ) 
ADN said Mr. Honecker , a hard-line Stalinist who in 1961 supervised the construction of the Berlin Wall , also was relieved of his title as head of state and his position as chief of the military . 
Mr. Krenz is expected to be formally named to all three positions once the nation 's parliament convenes later this week . 
Mr. Honecker 's ignoble fall culminates nearly two decades of iron-handed leadership during which Mr. Honecker , now 77 years old , built East Germany into the most economically advanced nation in the Soviet bloc . 
His grip on power unraveled this summer as thousands of his countrymen , dissatisfied by the harshness of his rule , fled to the West . 
Thousands more have taken to the streets in the last month in East Germany 's largest wave of domestic unrest since a workers ' uprising in 1953 . 
In Washington , the Bush administration took a characteristically cautious and skeptical view of the leadership change . 
The official line was to offer warmer ties to Mr. Krenz , provided he is willing to institute reforms . 
But U.S. officials have strong doubts that he is a reformer . 
President Bush told reporters : `` Whether that { the leadership change } reflects a change in East-West relations , I do n't think so . 
Because Mr. Krenz has been very much in accord with the policies of Honecker . '' 
One top U.S. expert on East Germany added : `` There is no clear-cut champion of reform , that we know of , in the East German leadership . '' 
Indeed , Mr. Krenz said on East German television last night that there will be no sharing of power with pro-democracy groups . 
He said , while dialogue is important , enough forums already exist `` in which different interests '' can express themselves . 
The removal of Mr. Honecker was apparently the result of bitter infighting within the top ranks of the Communist party . 
According to West German government sources , Mr. Honecker and several senior Politburo members fought over the last week to delay any decisions about a leadership change . 
But , with public demonstrations in the country growing in size and intensity , Mr. Honecker and several key allies lost out in this battle , officials say . 
Those allies included Politburo members Guenter Mittag , who has long headed economic affairs , and Joachim Hermann , chief of information policy . 
Both men were also relieved of their duties yesterday . 
Although other resignations may follow , it 's still not clear to what extent the change in party personnel will alter the government 's resistance to fundamental change . 
Clearly , the central figure in this process is Egon Krenz . 
Born in 1937 in a Baltic Sea town now part of Poland , he was eight years old when World War II ended . 
Like West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl , he represents the postwar generation that has grown up during Germany 's division . 
Since joining the Politburo in 1983 as its youngest member , Mr. Krenz had acquired the nickname `` crown prince , '' a reference to the widely held view that he was the hand-picked successor to Mr. Honecker . 
In fact , the two men have had strikingly similar career paths , both having served as chief of internal security before their rise to the top party position . 
Moreover , both men have hewn to a similar hard-line philosophy . 
Notably , one of Mr. Krenz 's few official visits overseas came a few months ago , when he visited China after the massacre in Beijing . 
He later defended the Chinese government 's response during a separate visit to West Germany . 
East German Protestantism in particular fears Mr. Krenz , in part because of an incident in January 1988 when he was believed to have ordered the arrest of hundreds of dissidents who had sought refuge in the Church . 
However , Mr. Krenz also has a reputation for being politically savvy . 
His shrewd ability to read the shifting popular mood in East Germany is best illustrated by his apparent break with his old mentor , Mr. Honecker . 
Indeed , according to West German government sources , he was one of the leaders in the power struggle that toppled Mr. Honecker . 
In recent days , Mr. Krenz has sought to project a kinder image . 
According to a report widely circulating in East Berlin , it was Mr. Krenz who ordered police to stop using excessive force against demonstrators in Leipzig . 
`` He does n't want to have the image of the gun man , '' says Fred Oldenburg , an expert at the Bonn-sponsored Institute of East European and International Studies in Cologne . 
`` He 's not a reformer -- he wants to have the image of a reformer . '' 
As part of his image polishing , Mr. Krenz is expected to take modest steps toward reform to rebuild confidence among the people and reassert the party 's authority . 
Besides sacking other senior Politburo officials who allied themselves with Mr. Honecker , Mr. Krenz could loosen controls on the news media , free up travel restrictions , and establish a dialogue with various dissident groups . 
But will it be enough ? 
West German government officials and Western analysts are doubtful . 
`` He does n't signify what people want , so the unrest will go on , '' Mr. Oldenburg predicts . 
At the same time , the expectations of the East German people are great and will continue to grow . 
Says one West German official : `` What 's necessary now is the process of democratization . 
Not just that people are being heard but that their interests are being taken seriously . '' 
Chancellor Kohl , meanwhile , has invited Mr. Krenz to open discussions with Bonn on a wide range of subjects . 
Reports in the West German press , citing sources in East Germany , suggest Mr. Krenz may serve only as a bridge between Mr. Honecker and a genuine reform leader . 
Adding to that speculation is Mr. Krenz 's reputation as a heavy drinker , who is said to also suffer from diabetes . 
`` This is a dynamic process and we 're experiencing the first step , '' the Bonn official adds . 
The selection of Mr. Krenz may also disappoint Moscow . 
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev has pressed hard for a change in East Germany 's rigid stance . 
Two reform-minded party leaders favored by Moscow as possible successors to Mr. Honecker , Dresden party secretary Hans Modrow and Politburo member Guenter Schabowski , were passed over . 
If Mr. Krenz sticks to rigid policies the pressure from the Soviet Union could intensify . 
In Moscow , Mr. Gorbachev sent Mr. Krenz a congratulatory telegram that appeared to urge the new leadership to heed growing calls for change . 
According to the Soviet news agency Tass , `` Gorbachev expressed the conviction that the leadership of the Socialist Unity Party of { East } Germany , being sensitive to the demands of the time , ... will find solutions to complicated problems the GDR { German Democratic Republic } encountered . '' 
A force of younger pro-Gorbachev members in the East German bureaucracy has for some time been pushing for relaxation within their country . 
The older generation has been torn between a fear of tampering with the status quo and a fear of what might happen if they did n't . 
From the perspective of East Germany 's old guard , reforms that smack of capitalism and Western-style democracy could eliminate their country 's reason for being . 
Unlike the other nations of the bloc , East Germany is a creature of the Cold War . 
Erasing the differences still dividing Europe , and the vast international reordering that implies , wo n't endanger the statehood of a Poland or a Hungary . 
But it could ultimately lead to German reunification and the disappearance of East Germany from the map . 
Which is what the Old Guard fears . 
`` I 'm sure they 'll formulate a reform that will be a recipe for the GDR 's future as a separately identifiable state , '' says Michael Simmons , a British journalist whose book on East Germany , entitled `` The Unloved Country , '' was published this month . 
Up to now , that recipe has consisted of a dogged effort by former leader Walter Ulbricht to establish the country 's international legitimacy , followed by Mr. Honecker 's campaign to build the East bloc 's only successful Stalinist economy into a consumer paradise . 
Neither man achieved perfection . 
Early in 1987 , Mr. Honecker and his team stopped paying thin compliments to Mr. Gorbachev and joined with Romania in rejecting any necessity for adjustments in their systems . 
The less-self-confident Czechoslovaks and Bulgarians , in contrast , declared their intentions to reform , while doing nothing concrete about it . 
The East German media soon began presenting Mr. Gorbachev 's speeches only as sketchy summaries , and giving space to his opponents . 
By late 1988 , they were banning Soviet publications . 
The country abandoned its former devotion to socialist unity and took to insisting instead that each country in the bloc ought to travel its own road . 
Mr. Honecker spoke of `` generally valid objective laws of socialism '' and left no room for debate . 
With this year 's dislocations in China and the Soviet Union , and the drive to democracy in Poland and Hungary , the East German leadership grew still more defensive . 
Politburo member Joachim Herrman confessed to a `` grave concern '' over Hungarian democracy . 
`` Under the banner that proclaims the ` renewal of socialism , ' '' he said , `` forces are at work that are striving to eliminate socialism . '' 
Some loyal voices , in and out of the East German Communist party , saw the nation 's unrest coming . 
The first signs were economic . 
Despite heavily subsidized consumer industries , East Germans have for years watched the West pull farther out ahead . 
In 1988 , for the first time , economic growth came to a dead stop . 
Gingerly , some economists began to blame central planning . 
Some writers in theoretical journals even raised the notion of introducing democracy , at least in the workplace . 
By summer , an independent reform movement was saying out loud what it had only whispered before . 
But they are stalwart socialists . 
Their proclaimed purpose is to cleanse East Germany of its Stalinist muck , not to merge with the West . 
One of their pastors has envisioned a `` new utopia '' of `` creative socialism . '' 
Meanwhile , the man Mr. Krenz replaces has left an indelible mark on East German society . 
Imprisoned by the Nazis during World War II for his political beliefs , Mr. Honecker typified the postwar generation of committed Communist leaders in Eastern Europe who took their cues from Moscow . 
He was a `` socialist warrior '' who felt rankled by West Germany 's enormous postwar prosperity and the Bonn government 's steadfast refusal to recognize the legitimacy of his state . 
Finally , during his first and only state visit to Bonn two years ago , he won some measure of the recognition he had long sought . 
But ultimately he was undone by forces unleashed by his own comrade , Mr. Gorbachev . 
Mr. Honecker 's removal `` was bound to happen , '' says one aide to Chancellor Kohl . 
`` It was only a matter of time . '' 
The European Community Commission increased its forecast for economic growth in the EC in 1989 to 3.5 % , slightly higher than its June projection of 3.25 % . 
In its annual economic report for 1989-1990 , the commission also projected 1990 gross domestic product growth for the 12 EC members at 3 % . 
EC inflation was seen at 4.8 % in 1989 , higher than 1988 's 3.6 % price rise . 
However , inflation for 1990 was seen slowing to 4.5 % . 
Leading EC growth forecasts in 1989 was Ireland , seen growing 5 % at constant prices . 
Slower growth countries included Greece , at 2.5 % , the U.K. , at 2.25 % , and Denmark , at 1.75 % . 
Inflation is expected to be highest in Greece , where it is projected at 14.25 % , and Portugal , at 13 % . 
At the other end of the spectrum , West German inflation was forecast at 3 % in 1989 and 2.75 % in 1990 . 
Nestle Korea Ltd. opened a coffee and non-dairy-creamer plant in Chongju , South Korea . 
An official at Nestle Korea , a 50-50 joint venture between Nestle S.A. and the Doosan Group , said the new facility will manufacture all types of soluble , roasted and ground coffee , coffee mix and nondairy coffee creamer . 
The South Korean coffee market , consisting mostly of instant coffee , was estimated at about 100 billion won ( $ 150.7 million ) last year . 
Brands made by the Kraft General Foods unit of Philip Morris Cos. had about 95 % of the market share . 
Nestle currently has only about a 2 % share with its Taster 's Choice coffee . 
Poland plans to start negotiations soon on purchasing natural gas from Iran , the official Islamic Republic News Agency reported . 
The agency said Polish Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki told Iranian Deputy Foreign Minister Mahmoud Vaezi of Poland 's willingess to purchase the gas during Mr. Vaezi 's current visit to Warsaw . 
The agency did n't mention possible quantities and did n't say how the gas would be delivered . 
A Chinese official harshly criticized plans to close a British naval base in downtown Hong Kong . 
Hong Kong officials announced last week that the base will be relocated to a small island to allow downtown redevelopment . 
But Beijing wants to use the base for the People 's Liberation Army after 1997 , when the territory returns to Chinese sovereignty . 
Ke Zaishuo , head of China 's delegation to a Chinese-British Liaison Committee on Hong Kong , accused Britain of trying to impose a fait accompli and said , `` This is something we can not accept . '' 
The Israeli and Soviet national airlines have reached preliminary agreement for launching the first direct flights between Tel Aviv and Moscow , a spokesman for the Israeli airline , El Al , said . 
El Al director Rafi Har-Lev and top officials of the Soviet Union 's Aeroflot negotiated a preliminary pact in Moscow this week , the spokesman said . 
He added that concluding the deal requires approval by the governments of both countries , which have never had direct air links . 
The chairman and a director of one of the Republic of Singapore 's leading property companies , City Development Ltd. , or CDL , were charged yesterday with criminal breach of trust of some 800,000 Singapore dollars ( about US$ 409,000 ) . 
Kwek Hong Png , chairman of CDL , and director Quek Leng Chye were arrested by the republic 's Corrupt Practices Investigation Bureau Tuesday night . 
In addition to abetting in the alleged criminal breach of trust , Kwek Hong Png was also charged with dishonestly receiving S$ 500,000 that had been stolen . 
Both men were charged in a subordinate court and released on bail of S$ 1 million . 
The charges are the culmination of weeks of rumors concerning CDL that have depressed the company 's share price and to a lesser extent the shares of all companies owned by CDL 's controlling Quek family , brokers in Singapore say . 
The Queks control the Hong Leong Group , which has widespread interests in manufacturing , property and finance in both Malaysia and Singapore . 
News of the arrest and charging of the two men helped to push prices on the Singapore Stock market sharply lower in early trading yesterday , but brokers said that the market and CDL shares recovered once it became apparent the charges were limited to the two men personally . 
One of the two British companies still making hard toilet paper stopped production of it . 
British Tissues decided to do away with its hard paper after a major customer , British Rail , switched to softer tissues for train bathrooms ... . 
Peasants in Inner Mongolia have partly dismantled a 20-mile section of China 's famed Great Wall , the official People 's Daily said . 
The paper said the bricks were used to build homes and furnaces and , as a result , the wall `` is in terrible shape . 
Wednesday , October 18 , 1989 
The key U.S. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but do n't always represent actual transactions . 
PRIME RATE : 10 1\/2 % . 
The base rate on corporate loans at large U.S. money center commercial banks . 
FEDERAL FUNDS : 8 15\/16 % high , 8 5\/8 % low , 8 3\/4 % near closing bid , 8 7\/8 % offered . 
Reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $ 1 million or more . 
Source : Fulton Prebon ( U.S.A . ) Inc . 
DISCOUNT RATE : 7 % . 
The charge on loans to depository institutions by the New York Federal Reserve Bank . 
CALL MONEY : 9 3\/4 % to 10 % . 
The charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER placed directly by General Motors Acceptance Corp. : 8.45 % 30 to 44 days ; 8.25 % 45 to 74 days ; 8.30 % 75 to 99 days ; 7.75 % 100 to 179 days ; 7.50 % 180 to 270 days . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER : High-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $ 1,000 : 8.55 % 30 days ; 8.45 % 60 days ; 8.375 % 90 days . 
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT : 8.05 % one month ; 8.02 % two months ; 8 % three months ; 7.98 % six months ; 7.95 % one year . 
Average of top rates paid by major New York banks on primary new issues of negotiable C.D.s , usually on amounts of $ 1 million and more . 
The minimum unit is $ 100,000 . 
Typical rates in the secondary market : 8.53 % one month ; 8.48 % three months ; 8.40 % six months . 
BANKERS ACCEPTANCES : 8.42 % 30 days ; 8.30 % 60 days ; 8.28 % 90 days ; 8.15 % 120 days ; 8.05 % 150 days ; 7.95 % 180 days . 
Negotiable , bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order . 
LONDON LATE EURODOLLARS : 8 11\/16 % to 8 9\/16 % one month ; 8 5\/8 % to 8 1\/2 % two months ; 8 5\/8 % to 8 1\/2 % three months ; 8 9\/16 % to 8 7\/16 % four months ; 8 1\/2 % to 8 3\/8 % five months ; 8 1\/2 % to 8 3\/8 % six months . 
LONDON INTERBANK OFFERED RATES ( LIBOR ) : 8 11\/16 % one month ; 8 11\/16 % three months ; 8 1\/2 % six months ; 8 1\/2 % one year . 
The average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the London market based on quotations at five major banks . 
FOREIGN PRIME RATES : Canada 13.50 % ; Germany 8.50 % ; Japan 4.875 % ; Switzerland 8.50 % ; Britain 15 % . 
These rate indications are n't directly comparable ; lending practices vary widely by location . 
TREASURY BILLS : Results of the Monday , October 16 , 1989 , auction of short-term U.S. government bills , sold at a discount from face value in units of $ 10,000 to $ 1 million : 7.37 % 13 weeks ; 7.42 % 26 weeks . 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP . ( Freddie Mac ) : 
Posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days . 
9.88 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 7.875 % , 2 % rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION ( Fannie Mae ) : 
Posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days ( priced at par ) 9.83 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 8.70 % , 6\/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
MERRILL LYNCH READY ASSETS TRUST : 8.50 % . 
Annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days ; not a forecast of future returns . 
A grand jury here indicted Norton Co. 's former director of advanced-ceramics research , charging him with interstate transportation of stolen property . 
Norton and General Electric Co. last month filed a lawsuit against the former research manager , Chien-Min Sung , charging him with stealing trade secrets . 
Mr. Sung formerly worked at General Electric in research on synthetic diamonds . 
The criminal charges brought against him involved GE technology , according the court documents . 
If convicted , he could be imprisoned for up to 10 years and fined $ 250,000 . 
Mr. Sung could n't be reached for comment . 
He earlier denied the allegations against him in the lawsuit by Norton and GE . 
Norton makes sandpaper and other abrasives , diamond tools , specialty plastics and ceramics . 
As the citizens of San Francisco and surrounding communities began assessing the damage from Tuesday 's devastating earthquake , NBC News began assessing the damage from what some said was a failure to provide comprehensive coverage in the earthquake 's initial moments . 
`` In terms of coverage , it was a disaster equal to the earthquakes , '' said Eric Premner , president for broadcasting of King Broadcasting Co. , which owns the NBC affiliate in Seattle , Wash . 
While rival ABC News outstripped the competition in live coverage of the event by sheer luck -- the network was broadcasting the World Series from Candlestick Park when the quake struck -- NBC News was unable to get its signal out of San Francisco for the first hour after the quake . 
`` I have to attribute the lackluster performance to a natural disaster , '' said Mr. Premner . 
`` So before I start to be really critical of NBC , I would like to know more about what happened . '' 
There were no complaints from affiliates of CBS Inc. and Cable News Network , a unit of Turner Broadcasting System Inc . 
But that was not the case at NBC News , which has been dogged with the image of not being aggressive on major breaking stories . 
Last summer , the affiliates bitterly complained to network executives about the poor coverage of the student uprising in China . 
`` I was not pleased with the slow start , and neither was NBC News , '' said Guy Hempel , general manager of NBC affiliate WAVE in Louisville , Ky . 
A spokesman for National Broadcasting Co. , a unit of General Electric Co. , said the network was `` looking into what happened . '' 
The stations said they were pleased with the extended coverage yesterday , including a special five-hour edition of `` Today . '' 
Don Browne , director of news at NBC News , said in an interview that `` we could n't get a signal out of San Francisco . 
We were out of the box . 
It was horrible . 
The comment we 're hearing is that we were slow out of the box , but beat everyone else in the stretch . '' 
NBC broadcast throughout the entire night and did not go off the air until noon yesterday . 
The quake postponed the third and fourth games of the World Series . 
In place of the games , ABC said it planned to broadcast next week 's episodes of its prime-time Wednesday and Thursday lineups , except for a one-hour special on the earthquake at 10 p.m. last night . 
The series is scheduled to resume Tuesday evening in San Francisco . 
`` There are no commercials to make up for since we 're going to eventually broadcast the World Series , '' said a network spokesman . 
Pinnacle West Capital Corp. said it suspended indefinitely its common stock dividend and reported a 91 % plunge in third-quarter net income . 
The announcement , made after the close of trading , caught analysts by surprise . 
The company closed at $ 12 a share , down 62.5 cents , in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
Pinnacle West slashed its quarterly dividend to 40 cents per share from 70 cents in December , saying at the time that it believed the new , lower dividend was `` sustainable . '' 
A company spokesman said the decision to eliminate the dividend resulted from a quarterly appraisal and that circumstances had changed since the December announcement . 
He declined to elaborate . 
Edward J. Tirello Jr. , an analyst at Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. , speculated that the sudden dividend elimination presages an expensive agreement with thrift regulators over the company 's insolvent MeraBank savings and loan unit . 
Analysts have estimated that Pinnacle West may have to inject between $ 300 million and $ 400 million into the MeraBank unit before turning the thrift over to federal regulators . 
The latest financial results at the troubled utility and thrift holding company , based in Phoenix , Ariz. , reflect continuing problems at MeraBank and losses in real-estate , venture-capital and uranium-mining operations . 
Third-quarter net income slid to $ 5.1 million , or six cents a share , from $ 56 million , or 65 cents , a year earlier . 
Utility operations , the only company unit operating in the black in the latest period , had a 26 % drop in profit , to $ 86.3 million , largely as a result of outages at the company 's huge Palo Verde nuclear facility and the cost of purchased replacement power . 
In other operations , losses at MeraBank totaled $ 85.7 million in the latest quarter , compared with a $ 2.5 million profit a year earlier . 
The latest quarter includes a $ 42.7 million addition to loan-loss reserves . 
As recently as August , the company said it did n't foresee a need for substantial additions to reserves . 
Pinnacle 's SunCor Development Co . real-estate unit 's loss narrowed to $ 13.8 million from $ 78.4 million . 
The latest period included a $ 9 million write-down on undeveloped land , while the year-earlier period included a $ 46 million reserve for real-estate losses . 
Losses at its Malapai Resources Co . uranium-mining unit narrowed to $ 3.4 million from $ 18 million a year ago , which included a $ 9 million write-down of utility inventories . 
Losses at El Dorado Investment Co. , the venture-capital operation , widened to $ 6.8 million from $ 425,000 a year earlier . 
The latest quarter included a $ 6.6 million write-down of investments . 
Equitec Financial Group said it will ask as many as 100,000 investors in 12 of its public real-estate limited partnerships to give approval to rolling them up into a new master limited partnership . 
Under the proposal by Equitec , a financially troubled real-estate syndicator , New York-based Hallwood Group Inc. would replace Equitec as the newly formed master limited partnership 's general partner and manager . 
Shares of the new partnership would trade on an exchange like a stock . 
Hallwood is a merchant bank whose activities include the ownership , management and financial restructuring of shopping centers , office buildings , apartments and other real estate . 
In a statement , Equitec Chairman Richard L. Saalfeld said the transfer will benefit both the company and investors in the 12 limited partnerships included in the proposed rollup . 
While he did n't describe the partnerships ' financial condition , he said their operations `` continue to drain the resources of Equitec . '' 
Equitec posted a $ 3.3 million net loss in the second quarter on $ 11.8 million of revenue , compared with a net loss of $ 12.9 million in the year-earlier period on revenue of $ 9.1 million . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Equitec closed at $ 2.625 a share , unchanged . 
Because of Tuesday 's earthquake in Northern California , company officials could n't immediately be reached for additional comment . 
A spokesman for Hallwood said the 12 limited partnerships , which were marketed by brokerage firms and financial planners between 1979 and 1984 , raised several hundred million dollars from investors . 
With airline deals in a tailspin , legendary Wall Street trader Michael Steinhardt could have trouble parachuting out of USAir Group , traders say . 
Only a week ago , when airline buy-out fever was already winding down , Mr. Steinhardt was engaged in a duel with USAir . 
He was threatening to take over the carrier , after spending an estimated $ 167 million to build an 8.4 % USAir stake for his investment clients . 
The would-be raider even hired an investment banker to give teeth to his takeover threat , which was widely interpreted as an effort to flush out an acquirer for USAir , or for his own stake . 
In fighting USAir , Mr. Steinhardt was pitted against another investor , billionnaire Warren Buffett , who bought into USAir to help fend off Mr. Steinhardt . 
Mr. Buffett 's firm , Berkshire Hathaway , holds a much bigger stake in the carrier than Mr. Steinhardt 's firm , Steinhardt Partners . 
Now , in the wake of UAL 's troubles in financing its buy-out , the airline raiding game has been grounded . 
Instead of hoping to sell his USAir stake at analysts ' estimated buy-out price of $ 80 a share , Mr. Steinhardt is stuck with roughly 3.7 million USAir shares that cost him $ 45 , on average , but yesterday closed at 40 1\/2 , up 1\/4 , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
`` It does n't make sense to parachute out at this price , '' Mr. Steinhardt says , though he has stopped his takeover talk and now commends USAir managers ' `` operating skills . '' 
At the current price , the USAir holding represents 9 % of all the assets that Mr. Steinhardt manages . 
A week ago , USAir stock briefly soared above 52 after a report in USA Today that Mr. Steinhardt might launch a hostile bid for the carrier , though takeover speculators say they were skeptical . 
`` If USAir is worth 80 as a takeover and the stock went to 52 , the market was saying Steinhardt 's presence was n't worth anything , in terms of getting a deal done , '' says a veteran takeover speculator . 
Traders say this all goes to show that even the smartest money manager can get infected with crowd passions . 
In trying to raid USAir , Mr. Steinhardt abandoned his usual role as a passive investor , and ran into snags . 
Moreover , unlike Mr. Buffett , who often holds big stakes in companies for years , Mr. Steinhardt has n't in the past done much long-term investing . 
Mr. Steinhardt , who runs about $ 1.7 billion for Steinhardt Partners , made his name as a gunslinging trader , moving in and out of stocks with agility -- enriching himself and his investment clients . 
Meanwhile , his big losses , for instance in 1987 's crash , generally have been trading losses . 
So , some see a special irony in the fact that Mr. Steinhardt , the trader , now is encumbered with a massive , illiquid airline holding . 
Analysts say USAir stock might lose four or five points if the Steinhardt stake was dumped all at once . 
As a result , Mr. Steinhardt must reconcile himself to selling USAir at a loss , or to holding the shares as an old-fashioned investment . 
`` Long-term investing -- that 's not Steinhardt 's style , '' chuckles an investor who once worked at Steinhardt Partners . 
`` He does n't usually risk that much unless he thinks he has an ace in the hole , '' adds another Steinhardt Partners alumnus . 
In recent days , traders say USAir has been buying its own shares , as part of a program to retire about eight million USAir shares , though the carrier wo n't discuss its buy-back program . 
If USAir stepped up its share purchases , that might be a way for Mr. Steinhardt to get out , says Timothy Pettee , a Merrill Lynch analyst . 
But USAir might not want to help Mr. Steinhardt , he adds . 
In 1987 , USAir Chairman Edwin Colodny stonewalled when Trans World Airlines Chairman Carl Icahn threatened to take over the carrier . 
Mr. Icahn , a much more practiced raider than Mr. Steinhardt , eventually sold a big USAir stake at a tiny profit through Bear , Stearns . 
Mr. Steinhardt also could take that route . 
He confers big trading commissions on Wall Street firms . 
However , with airline stocks cratering , he might not get a very good price for his shares , traders say . 
Especially galling for Mr. Steinhardt , say people close to him , is that USAir 's Mr. Colodny wo n't even take his telephone calls . 
While USAir is n't considered absolutely takeover-proof , its defenses , including the sale in August of a 12 % stake in the company to Mr. Buffett 's Berkshire Hathaway , are pretty strong . 
USAir 's deal with Mr. Buffett `` was n't exactly a shining example of shareholder democracy , '' Mr. Steinhardt says . 
Since last April , the investor has made seven so-called 13D filings in USAir , as he bought and sold the company 's stock . 
Such disclosures of big holdings often are used by raiders to try to scare a company 's managers , and to stir interest in the stock . 
But of course it would be highly unusual for an investment fund such as Steinhardt Partners to take over a company . 
USAir and Mr. Buffett wo n't talk about Mr. Steinhardt at all . 
Analysts say USAir has great promise . 
By the second half of 1990 , USAir stock could hit 60 , says Helane Becker of Shearson Lehman Hutton . 
She thinks traders should buy the stock if it tumbles to 35 . 
But meanwhile , USAir is expected to show losses or lackluster profit for several quarters as it tries to digest Piedmont Airlines , which it acquired . 
Moreover , some investors think a recession or renewed airfare wars will pummel airline stocks in coming months . 
However , Mr. Steinhardt says he 's `` comfortable holding USAir as an investment . '' 
While he has bought and sold some USAir shares in recent days , he says that contrary to rumors , he has n't tried to unload his holding . 
Mr. Steinhardt adds that he bought USAir stock earlier this year as `` part of a fundamental investment in the airline group . '' 
In 1989 , Mr. Steinhardt says he made money trading in Texas Air , AMR and UAL . 
Overall , his investments so far this year are showing gains of about 20 % , he adds . 
Does Mr. Steinhardt regret his incursion into the takeover-threat game ? 
People close to the investor say that was an experiment he is unlikely to repeat . 
`` I do n't think you 'll find I 'm making a radical change in my traditional investment style , '' Mr. Steinhardt says . 
Addington Resources Inc. said it called for redemption on Nov. 21 its $ 25.8 million outstanding of 8 % convertible subordinated debentures due 2013 . 
The debentures were issued in the face amount of $ 46 million on July 11 , 1988 , the Ashland , Ky. , coal mining , water transportation and construction company said . 
The company said the redemption is permitted because the price of Addington 's stock has equaled or exceeded $ 19.60 for 20 consecutive trading days , a condition set in the terms of the debentures . 
Debenture holders are expected to convert most of the debentures into common because the value of the stock received in a conversion would exceed the $ 1,103.11 redemption price . 
Commodore International Ltd. said it will report a loss for the first quarter ended Sept. 30 because sales of personal computers for the home market remained weak in some major countries . 
That will mark the second consecutive quarterly loss for Commodore and will raise additional questions about whether it can sustain the turnaround it had seemed to be engineering . 
Commodore , West Chester , Pa. , had said in August that it was consolidating manufacturing to cut costs and expected to be profitable in the fiscal first quarter . 
Commodore said that its announcement is based on preliminary information and that the situation could look different by the time final results are announced early next month . 
In fact , Commodore 's fiscal fourth-quarter loss was $ 2 million narrower than Commodore had expected a few weeks after the quarter closed . 
Still , even results approaching break-even would mark a sharp weakening compared with fiscal 1989 first-quarter earnings of $ 9.6 million , or 30 cents a share , on sales of $ 200.2 million . 
Reflecting concerns about Commodore 's outlook , its stock has plunged more than 50 % since May , closing yesterday unchanged at $ 8.875 a share in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
The price can be expected to erode further , because the loss estimate came after the market closed . 
Commodore has seemed to be setting the stage recently for progress in the U.S. , where its personal-computer sales have been so dismal for years that Commodore is close to dropping off research firms ' market-share charts . 
Commodore has assembled an experienced management team , it has persuaded many more dealers to carry its products and it has unleashed a slick advertising campaign . 
But those represent long-term strategies that probably wo n't succeed quickly , even if they turn out to be the right ones . 
In the meantime , the strategies will increase expenses . 
Commodore had been counting on its consumer business to stay sufficiently healthy to support its efforts in other areas -- mainly in getting schools and businesses to use its Amiga , which has slick graphics yet has been slow to catch on because it is n't compatible with Apple Computer Inc. or International Business Machines Corp. hardware . 
But sales to consumers have become difficult during the past several months , even in West Germany , which has been by far Commodore 's strongest market . 
The Commodore 64 and 128 , mainly used for children 's educational software and games , had surprised market researchers by continuing to produce strong sales even though other low-profit personal computers now operate several times as fast and have much more memory . 
Commodore has said it expects sales to rebound , but market researchers have said that sales of the low-end products may finally be trailing off . 
Stock prices closed slightly higher in the first routine trading day since Friday 's big plunge . 
Some issues were affected by Tuesday 's devastating earthquake in the San Francisco area . 
Activity continued to slow from the hectic pace set during the market 's plunge late Friday and its rebound Monday , as players began to set their sights on events coming later this week . 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average drifted through the session within a trading range of about 30 points before closing with a gain of 4.92 at 2643.65 . 
Broader averages also posted modest gains . 
Standard & Poor 's 500-Stock Index rose 0.60 to 341.76 , the Dow Jones Equity Market Index rose 0.71 to 320.54 and the New York Stock Exchange Composite Index gained 0.43 to 189.32 . 
Some 822 New York Stock Exchange issues advanced in price , while 668 declined . 
But the Dow Jones Transportation Average went down for the seventh consecutive session , due largely to further selling in UAL . 
The average dropped 6.40 to 1247.87 and has now lost 21.7 % of its value since the losing streak began Oct. 10 . 
Big Board volume dropped to 166,900,000 shares , in line with the level of trading over the past few weeks , from 224.1 million Tuesday . 
Traders cited anticipation of the consumer price report for September , due today , and tomorrow 's expiration of October stock-index futures and options as major factors in the slowdown . 
In addition , activity at a number of San Francisco-based brokerage houses was curtailed as a result of the earthquake , which knocked out power lines and telephone service throughout the Bay area . 
Stocks retreated to session lows just after the opening amid worries about the market impact of the quake , but quickly snapped back to higher levels with the help of futures-related program buying . 
The early move essentially established the day 's trading range , and traders said they saw little of the program activity that has battered the market recently . 
`` I did n't expect it to be this quiet . 
I expected to see more volatility as some of the institutions who were spooked last Friday did some selling , '' said Raymond F. DeVoe , a market strategist at Legg Mason Wood Walker , Baltimore . 
Mr. DeVoe said he expects prices to show some renewed instability over the next few sessions as institutions re-evaluate their stance toward the market in light of its decline . 
`` I would suspect that a lot of investment committees are looking into whether ( they ) want to be in stocks at all , '' he said . 
Insurance stocks were sold at the opening amid concerns about the level of damage claims the companies would receive as a result of the earthquake . 
But those issues recovered quickly and turned higher because of expectations that the quake and the recent Hurricane Hugo would set the stage for an increase in premium rates . 
Issues of insurance brokers were especially strong . 
Marsh & McLennan advanced 3 1\/8 to 75 7\/8 , Alexander & Alexander Services climbed 2 to 32 and Corroon & Black firmed 1 7\/8 to 37 1\/2 . 
Elsewhere in the group , General Re rose 2 3\/4 to 86 1\/2 , American International Group gained 3 1\/4 to 102 5\/8 , Aetna Life & Casualty added 2 3\/8 to 59 1\/2 and Cigna advanced 7\/8 to 62 1\/2 . 
Loews , the parent of CNA Financial , rose 1 3\/8 to 123 1\/8 . 
Companies in the construction , engineering and building-products sectors were among other beneficiaries of earthquake-related buying . 
The heavy-construction sector was the session 's best performer among Dow Jones industry groups ; Fluor rose 3\/4 to 33 3\/8 , Morrison Knudsen gained 2 1\/4 to 44 1\/8 , Foster Wheeler added 3\/8 to 18 1\/4 and Ameron climbed 2 3\/8 to 39 3\/4 . 
Among engineering firms , CRS Sirrine rose 5\/8 to 34 1\/4 on the Big Board and four others rallied on the American Stock Exchange : Jacobs Engineering Group , which gained 1 1\/8 to 25 3\/8 , Greiner Engineering , which rose 3 1\/2 to 22 1\/2 ; Michael Baker , which added 1 1\/4 to 15 1\/4 , and American Science & Engineering , up 1\/2 to 8 1\/2 . 
Within the building-materials group , Georgia-Pacific climbed 1 1\/4 to 58 and Louisiana-Pacific added 1 to 40 3\/4 after Merrill Lynch recommended the forest-products issues . 
CalMat advanced 2 3\/4 to 28 3\/4 , Lone Star Industries gained 1 3\/4 to 29 1\/4 , Lafarge rose 1 to 19 1\/2 , Southdown added 5\/8 to 24 5\/8 and Eljer Industries rose 1 1\/4 to 24 7\/8 . 
Pacific Gas & Electric fell 3\/8 to 19 5\/8 in Big Board composite trading of 1.7 million shares and Pacific Telesis Group slipped 5\/8 to 44 5\/8 as the companies worked to restore service to areas affected by the quake . 
Chevron added 1 to 65 . 
The company , based in San Francisco , said it had to shut down a crude-oil pipeline in the Bay area to check for leaks but added that its refinery in nearby Richmond , Calif. , was undamaged . 
Other companies based in the area include Hewlett-Packard , which rose 1\/4 to 49 ; National Semiconductor , which went up 1\/4 to 7 5\/8 , and Genentech , which eased 1\/4 to 19 5\/8 . 
None of the firms reported any major damage to facilities as a result of the quake . 
BankAmerica eased 1\/2 to 31 7\/8 and Wells Fargo lost 1\/2 to 81 1\/2 ; the two bank holding companies , based in San Francisco , were forced to curtail some operations due to the temblor . 
Among California savings-and-loan stocks , H.F. Ahmanson eased 3\/8 to 22 1\/4 , CalFed slid 3\/4 to 24 1\/8 , Great Western Financial dropped 1\/2 to 21 1\/4 and Golden West Financial fell 5\/8 to 29 1\/4 . 
UAL , the parent company of United Airlines , swung within a 14-point range during the course of the session before closing at 191 3\/4 , down 6 1\/4 , on 2.3 million shares . 
British Airways , a member of the group that had offered $ 300 a share for UAL in a leveraged buy-out , said it had yet to receive a revised proposal and it was `` in no way committed '' to the completion of a bid . 
Separately , investor Marvin Davis withdrew his backup $ 300-a-share takeover offer . 
While UAL faltered , AMR , the parent of American Airlines , pulled out of its recent nosedive by rising 3\/4 to 74 . 
The stock had been on the decline since the financing for the UAL buy-out fell through on Friday and developer Donald Trump subsequently withdrew a takeover offer of $ 120 a share for AMR . 
Also , AMR was the most active Big Board issue ; 2.8 million shares changed hands . 
GTE added 1 1\/4 to 65 3\/8 . 
PaineWebber repeated a buy recommendation on the stock and raised its 1990 earnings estimate by 35 cents a share , to $ 5.10 . 
Colgate-Palmolive advanced 1 5\/8 to 63 after saying it was comfortable with analysts ' projections that third-quarter net income from continuing operations would be between 95 cents and $ 1.05 a share , up from 69 cents a year ago . 
Springs Industries dropped 1 3\/8 to 36 . 
Analysts at several brokerage firms lowered their 1989 and 1990 earnings estimates on the company after its third-quarter results proved disappointing . 
Trinova third-quarter loss after a charge for a planned restructuring , which will include the closing or downsizing of about 25 % of its plants and a work force cut of about 1,500 over three years . 
The Amex Market Value Index snapped a five-session losing streak by rising 2.91 to 378.07 . 
Volume totaled 12,500,000 shares . 
Carnival Cruise Lines Class A rose 1 1\/4 to 22 3\/8 . 
The company , citing market conditions , postponed a $ 200 million debt offer . 
Philip Morris Cos. posted a 20 % jump in third-quarter profit on a 45 % revenue increase , reflecting strength in the company 's cigarette , food and brewing businesses . 
Net income rose to $ 748 million , or 81 cents a share , from the year-earlier $ 621 million , or 67 cents a share . 
Per-share figures have been adjusted for a 4-for-1 stock split paid earlier this month . 
The New York-based tobacco , food and beer concern said revenue increased to $ 11.25 billion from $ 7.74 billion . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Philip Morris closed at $ 43.375 , up 12.5 cents . 
Philip Morris disclosed little detailed information about performance by major business lines except to say that most , including Philip Morris U.S.A. , Kraft General Foods and Miller Brewing Co. , posted increased revenues . 
For the nine months , net increased 4.4 % to $ 2.08 billion , or $ 2.25 a share , from $ 2 billion , which included $ 273 million reflecting the effect of an accounting change . 
Granges Inc. , citing depressed gold prices , said it plans to suspend operations for an indefinite period at its Tartan gold mine in Manitoba . 
Granges said in Vancouver , British Columbia , that the production halt will be phased in over a 10-week period . 
Tartan currently produces gold at a cash operating cost of $ 393 an ounce , which is high by industry standards and $ 25 or so above the current spot price . 
Granges said it also plans in the third quarter to write down the carrying value of the Tartan mine by 2.5 million Canadian dollars ( US$ 2.12 million ) , and to write off most of the C$ 6.3 million carrying value of its Windflower gold property in British Columbia . 
Granges did n't say what impact the moves would have on total gold output or earnings , and company officials were n't available . 
Computer Associates International Inc. , Garden City , N.Y. , and Digital Equipment Corp. said they agreed to jointly develop software to help manage Digital 's Vax computers . 
Computer Associates has carved out a huge business selling such software for use in managing networks of International Business Machines Corp. computers but needs to find new markets if it is to maintain its growth rate of 30 % and more each year . 
The market for system-management software for Digital 's hardware is fragmented enough that a giant such as Computer Associates should do well there . 
At the same time , the market is smaller than the market for IBM-compatible software . 
For one thing , Digital , Maynard , Mass. , has sold fewer machines . 
In addition , its machines are typically easier to operate , so customers require less assistance from software . 
Wang Laboratories Inc. , Lowell , Mass. , beset by declining demand for its computers , reported a $ 62.1 million , 38-cents-a-share loss in its first quarter ended Sept. 30 . 
Revenue fell 12.7 % to $ 596.8 million from $ 684 million , although some of the decline was caused by discontinued operations . 
Wang had previously forecast a loss . 
The company reiterated that it expects another loss in the second quarter and for the full year , although it expects a profitable fourth quarter . 
A year ago , Wang had earnings of $ 13.1 million , or eight cents a share , in its first quarter , including a $ 3.1 million loss from discontinued operations . 
The latest period loss included a $ 12.9 pretax charge for severance payments . 
Dayton Hudson Corp. said it accepted for purchase seven million common shares at $ 62.875 each , under the terms of a Dutch auction self-tender offer . 
The offer expired at 12:01 a.m. yesterday . 
In a Dutch auction , the buyer sets a price range and holders give a price in that range at which they 're willing to sell their shares . 
The buyer then picks a price and buys shares at that price from holders who offered to sell at that price or lower . 
Dayton Hudson 's repurchase offer , representing about 9 % of its common shares outstanding , had established a range of between $ 60 and $ 65 for the buy-back . 
Dayton Hudson said it accepted all odd-lot shares tendered at or below the final $ 62.875 price ; the preliminary proration factor for other shares tendered at or below the final price is 98 % . 
The Minneapolis-based retailer said it expects to pay for the seven million shares next Thursday . 
Tendered shares not purchased will be returned to holders . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Dayton rose $ 1 to $ 61.125 . 
Continental Bank Corp. 's third-quarter net income slipped 11 % despite a big gain from the sale of the company 's London headquarters building . 
The $ 55 million gain on the sale was offset by lower interest income , poorer results from foreign-exchange trading and a $ 9 million loss on the sale of a unit , Securities Settlement Corp . 
Chicago-based Continental earned $ 65.2 million , or $ 1.04 a share , compared with $ 73.6 million , or $ 1.19 a share , a year earlier . 
The 1988 quarter also included one-time gains totaling about $ 35 million . 
The bank , which has loss reserves equal to about half its long-term and medium-term loans to less-developed nations , said it does n't think additional reserves are required . 
Enron Corp. said a subsidiary and two United Kingdom firms are studying the feasibility of constructing a 1,500 megawatt gas-fired power plant in northern England as an outgrowth of the government 's privatization program . 
Enron Power Corp. , a unit of the Houston natural gas pipeline company , would design , construct and run the plant . 
Gas to fuel it would be piped from the North Sea . 
A subsidiary of Britain 's Imperial Chemical Industries would buy electricity and steam from the proposed station . 
Surplus power would be sold on the open market , Enron said . 
Also participating in the study , Enron said , is the National Power division of Britain 's Central Electricity Generating Board . 
Upon privatization , National Power will be responsible for 70 % of the country 's power generating business . 
Viacom Inc. , New York , reported that its third-quarter loss widened to $ 21.7 million , or 41 cents a share , primarily because of interest expense of $ 70.1 million . 
A year ago , Viacom had a net loss of $ 56.9 million , or $ 1.07 a share . 
Interest expense in the 1988 third quarter was $ 75.3 million . 
In the year-ago quarter , Viacom also paid preferred stock dividends of $ 17 million ; Viacom exchanged its preferred stock for debt in March . 
The communications and entertainment company said revenue rose to $ 345.5 million , from $ 311.6 million . 
Viacom attributed the improvement to higher earnings from operations in its networks segment , which includes the MTV and Showtime networks . 
Viacom said it also restructured bank debt under a $ 1.5 billion unsecured bank agreement that offers significant interest rate savings . 
Sumner M. Redstone , Viacom 's chairman , said Viacom `` emerged from our leveraged buy-out structure and gained substantial operating and financial flexibility through '' the bank pact . 
Trinova Corp. , Maumee , Ohio , said it is launching an extensive restructuring of its core business , and took a charge that resulted in a loss of $ 29.7 million , or 87 cents a share , for the third quarter . 
Trinova said it will close , move or overhaul 40 of its 170 manufacturing facilities and over the next three years cut 1,500 jobs from its current world-wide payroll of 22,300 employees . 
Most of the factory closings and job cutbacks will affect Trinova 's Aeroquip operations , which manufacture automotive plastics , hoses and other industrial and automotive parts . 
Hoses and plastics together account for about 42 % of Trinova 's total annual sales . 
In a separate announcement , Trinova said the Aeroquip group has agreed to sell its spring-brake , piston-brake and related businesses to Midland Brake Inc. of Branford , Conn . 
Terms were n't disclosed . 
To provide for the restructuring 's costs , Trinova said it took an after-tax charge of $ 38.5 million , or $ 1.13 a share , in the third quarter . 
The $ 29.7 million net loss compares with net income of $ 19.6 million , or 57 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales rose 8 % to $ 456.2 million from $ 422 million . 
Trinova closed at $ 25 , down $ 1 , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
A group of investors , including Giancarlo Parretti 's Pathe Communications Corp. and Sasea Holding S.A. , have agreed to buy 76.66 % of Odeon Finanziaria , a financially troubled Italian TV station . 
Florio Fiorini , managing director of Geneva-based Sasea , said the investors would pay only a symbolic one lira for the station , `` but we have agreed to raise the capital that will enable the company to continue operating . 
It 's sort of a Chapter 11 situation , '' he added , referring to the U.S. bankruptcy law that protects companies from creditors while they restructure . 
Milan-based Odeon , which draws about 3 % of Italian TV viewers , has debt of 250 billion lire ( $ 181.9 million ) , Mr. Fiorini said . 
He added that details of the recapitalization still have to be worked out , but that Pathe will take 50 % of Odeon , Rome film producer Bruno Lucisano will take 10 % and the remaining 16.66 % , currently owned by Sasea , will eventually be sold to other investors . 
Calisto Tanzi , Odeon 's owner , will retain his 23.34 % stake . 
Italy 's Supreme Court this year ordered Parliament to write a law that will regulate media ownership . 
`` We think that it 's going to be far more favorable to own a station before the law is passed than to try to buy one afterward , '' Mr. Fiorini said . 
San Francisco area officials gave the media high marks for helping people find shelter and obtain emergency information after Tuesday 's catastrophic earthquake . 
`` The press has been doing an excellent job . 
They are telling people what roads are closed and just keeping the public informed has helped to keep the panic down , '' said James Ball , a station supervisor at Daly City Police Department . 
Mr. Ball noted that television stations featured people holding up phone books , explaining where to call for help . 
Radio stations provided an emergency number for people who smelled gas but did n't know how to turn off their gas supply . 
Kim Schwartz , a spokesperson for the American Red Cross in Los Angeles , said television and radio stations in San Francisco played a `` very positive role '' by providing the address of 28 shelters of the Red Cross and by giving out the Red Cross number for contributions to help earthquake victims ( 1-800-453-9000 ) . 
The San Francisco Examiner issued a special edition around noon yesterday that was filled entirely with earthquake news and information . 
The Examiner and the San Francisco Chronicle were able to publish despite Tuesday 's quake , which occurred close to deadline for many newspapers . 
Sterling Software Inc. said it lost its bid to supply software services to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration 's Ames Research Center at Moffett Field , Calif . 
Sterling , which estimated the value of the contract at $ 150 million , said NASA selected another bidder for final negotiations . 
In 1988 , Dallas-based Sterling protested a similar decision by NASA involving the same contract , claiming it had submitted the lowest bid . 
As a result , last March the General Services Administration board of contract appeals directed NASA to reopen negotiations on the contract . 
Sterling said it had requested a briefing by NASA but had not decided whether to protest the agency 's latest decision . 
Consolidated Rail Corp. , New York , reported that third-quarter net income climbed 4.8 % to $ 87 million , or $ 1.27 a share , exceeding analysts ' expectations . 
In the year-earlier quarter , the freight railroad earned $ 83 million , or $ 1.21 a share . 
James A. Hagen , chairman and chief executive officer , noted that earnings advanced `` in the face of a drop in business , brought on by the general economic slowdown . '' 
Revenue slipped 4.6 % to $ 835 million from $ 876 million . 
For the rest of 1989 , Mr. Hagen said , Conrail 's traffic and revenue `` will reflect the sluggish economy , but Conrail will continue to take steps to control and reduce costs . '' 
For the nine months , Conrail earnings grew 0.4 % to $ 229 million , or $ 3.34 a share , from $ 228 million , or $ 3.31 a share . 
Revenue was flat at $ 2.59 billion . 
Georgia Gulf Corp. , hurt by declining sales and falling chemical prices , said third-quarter earnings fell 13 % to $ 46.1 million from $ 53.1 million in the year-earlier period . 
Sales declined 10 % to $ 251.2 million from $ 278.7 million . 
The Atlanta-based chemical manufacturer said lower prices hurt margins for most products . 
`` We did see some relief in raw material costs , but it was n't sufficient to offset the drop in sales prices , '' James R. Kuse , the company 's chairman and chief executive officer said in a statement . 
On a per-share basis , quarterly earnings remained at $ 1.85 , the same as last year , because of the company 's share buy-back program . 
Georgia Gulf had 24.9 million shares outstanding on average in the quarter , compared with 28.6 million in the third quarter of 1988 , adjusted for a stock split paid in January 1989 . 
In composite New York Stock Exchange trading , stock in Georgia Gulf , which has been mentioned as a takeover candidate , rose $ 2.125 a share to close at $ 46.125 . 
This temblor-prone city dispatched inspectors , firefighters and other earthquake-trained personnel to aid San Francisco . 
But a secondary agenda among officials in the City of Angels was to learn about the disaster-contingency plans that work and those that do n't . 
Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley used the opportunity to push the City Council harder to pass a measure establishing a loss-recovery reserve of $ 100 million . 
The amount would help Los Angeles cope in the first few weeks after its own anticipated quake , while waiting for federal assistance to arrive . 
After San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos spoke on television of the need for building inspectors to check the soundness of buildings , Los Angeles dispatched 32 inspectors to help . 
And the county of Los Angeles placed its firefighters and sheriffs on alert , ready to send in reinforcements , and alerted San Francisco that the city has 1,000 hospital beds at its disposal . 
Two Los Angeles radio stations initiated Red Cross donation campaigns , and one Los Angeles bank manager forked over $ 150,000 of his own money for relief purposes , the Red Cross said . 
The Los Angeles Red Cross sent 2,480 cots , 500 blankets , and 300 pints of Type-O blood . 
It is also pulling 20 people out of Puerto Rico , who were helping Huricane Hugo victims , and sending them to San Francisco instead . 
The Arizona Corporations Commission authorized an 11.5 % rate increase at Tucson Electric Power Co. , substantially lower than recommended last month by a commission hearing officer and barely half the rise sought by the utility . 
The ruling follows a host of problems at Tucson Electric , including major write-downs , a 60 % slash in the common stock dividend and the departure of former Chairman Einar Greve during a company investigation of his stock sales . 
The Arizona regulatory ruling calls for $ 42 million in added revenue yearly , compared with a $ 57 million boost proposed by the commission hearing officer . 
The company had sought increases totaling $ 80.3 million , or 22 % . 
The decision was announced after trading ended . 
Tucson Electric closed at $ 20.875 a share , down 25 cents , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
A Tucson Electric spokesman said the utility was disappointed by the commission 's decision and `` concerned about the financial integrity of the company . 
South Korean President Roh Tae Woo , brushing aside suggestions that the won be revalued again , said the currency 's current level against the dollar is `` appropriate . '' 
His comments , made in response to reporters ' questions at the National Press Club here , signaled that Seoul is resisting U.S. pressure for a further rise in the currency 's value . 
The U.S. wants a higher won to make South Korea 's exports more expensive and help trim Seoul 's trade surplus . 
Many South Korean business people want a devaluation instead , arguing that the won 's recent gains already have weakened the country 's export performance . 
Mr. Roh also said South Korea is taking steps that would free the won to respond to market forces . 
Seoul has pointed to its lack of a foreign exchange market as one reason the won 's value remains heavily controlled . 
Mr. Roh said a U.S. demand for the removal of South Korean import quotas on beef will be resolved `` satisfactorily '' but gave no hint when that will happen . 
Speaking to a joint meeting of Congress earlier , he said South Korea ca n't move quickly on such agricultural trade issues `` without causing political and social trauma . 
Great American Bank said its board approved the formation of a holding company enabling the savings bank to pursue nontraditional banking activities under a new federal law . 
The proposed holding company 's primary purpose would be to allow Great American to continue engaging in real estate development activities , it said . 
Those activities generated $ 26.1 million in operating profit last year . 
But according to Great American , such profits do n't count toward meeting the San Diego savings bank 's new capitalization requirements under 1989 federal law . 
The new real estate unit would have a separate capital structure to comply with the law . 
The proposed holding company would also consolidate Great American Bank in San Diego and its Tucson , Ariz. , savings bank into a single , federally chartered institution in San Diego . 
The consolidation is expected to save $ 1 million a year in administrative costs , a Great American spokesman said . 
Dale Lang , who this week completed the acquisition of the publisher of Ms. and Sassy , is candid about the challenge he is taking on . 
Mr. Lang admits that Ms. is `` in dire straits '' and that Sassy needs big promotional dollars to keep it alive . 
But the 57-year-old publisher has moved quickly and boldly to deal with the magazines ' problems . 
Last Friday , he told the staff of Ms. that the magazine in January would begin publishing without advertising . 
Mr. Lang will do away with expensive circulation drives , not to mention sales staff , and attempt to publish the 17-year-old magazine supported by circulation revenue alone . 
`` Any fool can publish a money-losing magazine . 
I want to publish one that succeeds , '' said Mr. Lang . 
`` For Ms. , it 's time to publish for the reader , not the advertiser . '' 
As for Sassy , which competes directly with News Corp. 's Seventeen magazine , Mr. Lang says that in the next two years he will spend $ 6 million promoting and improving the magazine . 
Though Sassy has grown quickly since its debut in March 1988 , it has been the target of conservative lobbyists and skittish advertisers who bristled at its frank editorial matter on teen-age problems . 
Mr. Lang said the former Australian owners of Sassy were `` blind-sided by the Moral Majority ... . 
Their reaction was to do nothing and ride it out . '' 
He said Sassy will keep its irreverent tone , but added , `` We will keep a close watch on the editorial content of the magazine . '' 
Sassy already has recovered ; circulation has quickly passed the 500,000 mark and advertising pages have stabilized this year at more than 300 . 
What 's more , Mr. Lang says he has what all publishers wish for : a bona fide niche . 
`` Seventeen is written more for mothers , not their daughters , '' said Mr. Lang . 
`` But Sassy has a different spirit . 
It gets more mail in a month than McCall 's got in a year , and it 's not from mothers . 
I feel about Sassy like I did about Working Woman 10 years ago . '' 
Mr. Lang took on Ms. and Sassy with the acquisition of Matilda Publications Inc. by his newly formed Lang Communications . 
Lang owns 70 % of Matilda , while Citicorp owns the rest through its Citicorp Venture Capital Partners . 
Two weeks ago , Citicorp and Mr. Lang pumped $ 800,000 into Matilda just to keep the doors open . 
Industry observers have congratulated Mr. Lang on what some call his `` courageous '' handling of Ms. , but his track record in magazine publishing in general has gotten mixed reviews . 
Besides Ms. and Sassy , closely held Lang Communications includes Success , a magazine for entrepreneurs and small businesses , and Working Woman and Working Mother , two monthly magazines . 
Working Woman , with circulation near one million , and Working Mother , with 625,000 circulation , are legitimate magazine success stories . 
The magazine Success , however , was for years lackluster and unfocused . 
Only recently has it been attractively redesigned and its editorial product improved . 
Success is expected to gain at least because of the recent folding of rival Venture , another magazine for growing companies . 
Working Woman and Working Mother have operated as part of Working Woman / McCall 's Group , a less-than-successful joint venture between Mr. Lang and Time Warner Inc . 
The joint venture is being undone , with McCall 's magazine being sold last summer to the New York Times Co. 's Magazine Group for about $ 80 million , and Time Warner agreeing to sell back its 50 % interest in Working Woman and Working Mother to Mr. Lang . 
Executives at Time Inc . Magazine Co. , a subsidiary of Time Warner , have said the joint venture with Mr. Lang was n't a good one . 
The venture , formed in 1986 , was supposed to be Time 's low-cost , safe entry into women 's magazines . 
Mr. Lang surprised Time soon after joining forces when he said he would negotiate rates individually with advertisers , a practice common in broadcasting but considered taboo by magazine publishers . 
In addition , McCall 's put in a less than stellar performance . 
Until a recent comeback , it saw steep losses in ad pages and circulation . 
Time executives complained about the shoddy editorial quality , and in the end , one Time executive who asked not to be identified said , `` Frankly , McCall 's and the joint venture were an embarrassment . '' 
Mr. Lang feels that Time 's priorities changed . 
`` Their management changed right after { the venture was formed } , and I do n't think they were comfortable getting into the competitive wars of women 's service magazines . '' 
Today , Mr. Lang believes his magazines will offer what many women 's magazines do n't . 
`` We write straight for women on their level , '' he said . 
`` We do n't have passive readers . '' 
Mr. Lang points out that even Success , in part , fits the company 's image , since about 30 % of its readership is female . 
Mr. Lang has named Carol Taber , 43 , as group publisher of New York-based Lang Communications . 
She will oversee Working Woman , Working Mother and Success magazines , and retain her post as publisher of Working Woman . 
The sale price of McCall 's -- twice what Mr. Lang originally paid for it -- will finance Lang Communications ' buy-back of Time Warner 's 50 % interest in Working Woman and Working Mother . 
Mr. Lang says he is n't scouting new acquisitions , at least for now . 
`` We would have to go outside to banks to get the money and I am not ready to do that , '' he said . 
`` Besides , we have enough on our plate . 
There is plenty of work to be done on what we have . 
Britain 's Monopolies and Mergers Commission Wednesday cleared Rhone-Poulenc S.A. 's purchase of a specialty bulk-chemical unit from Monsanto Co. , saying the purchase was unlikely to have any lasting impact on U.K. industrial consumers . 
The commission , which was asked to study the deal by the Department of Trade and Industry after its announcement in February , said the diversity of global supply of chemicals used in making analgesic drugs was great enough to offset the dominant U.K. market share Rhone-Poulenc would gain through the acquisition . 
The French chemical giant would hold an 80 % share of the U.K. market for salicylic acid , methyl salicylate and bulk aspirin . 
The commission found that if the British government attempted to block the merger , Rhone-Poulenc would likely respond by closing the salicylates plant Monsanto operates in Wales , removing the matter from U.K. jurisdiction . 
Morrison Knudsen Corp. posted third-quarter net income of $ 7.9 million , or 69 cents a share , continuing a rebound from steep year-ago losses . 
In the third quarter a year-earlier , the construction and engineering concern posted a loss of $ 51.2 million , or $ 4.68 a share . 
Revenue in the latest quarter rose 14 % to $ 589 million from $ 515.1 million . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Morrison gained $ 2.25 to $ 44.125 . 
Morrison said the engineering and construction segment performed well , with the mining and MK-Ferguson operations making important contributions . 
Boise , Idaho-based Morrison had losses totaling $ 186 million over the two years ended in December , but it has surged back to profitability as a result of cost-cutting and shedding of unprofitable operations . 
In the nine months , the company 's net income was $ 21.5 million , or $ 1.88 a share , compared with a year-earlier loss of $ 97.8 million , or $ 8.96 a share . 
Revenue rose 17 % to $ 1.62 billion from $ 1.39 billion . 
The House Ethics Committee officially cited Rep. Jim Bates ( D. , Calif . ) for sexually harassing two female employees , but did n't recommend formal disciplinary action . 
Rep. Bates said he accepted the finding , but one of the victims , Dorena Bertussi , denounced the ethics panel 's action as `` absurd . '' 
Acting more than a year after Ms. Bertussi filed a complaint , the panel issued a `` letter of reproval '' saying Rep. Bates had admitted conduct that violated a House rule forbidding discrimination against employees on account of their sex . 
It ordered Rep. Bates to write letters of apology to Ms. Bertussi and to a second complainant , Karen Dryden . 
Rep. Bates said he would write the letters as ordered . 
`` I accept the resolution of the matter by the Ethics Committee , '' he said . 
The panel also warned Rep. Bates that any further violations `` may result in a recommendation that disciplinary action be considered . '' 
But Ms. Bertussi asked , `` Who in their right mind is going to file another complaint with the Ethics Committee ? '' 
Rep. Bates has publicly begged for forgiveness from voters and was re-elected with 60 % of the vote last November . 
Mesa Airlines said the takeover offer it received earlier this week from StatesWest Airlines is for a combination of cash and securities valued by StatesWest at $ 10 a Mesa share . 
Both companies are regional carriers in the Southwest . 
When it made the offer , StatesWest declined to disclose details and asked Mesa to do the same . 
But Farmington , N.M.-based Mesa said the offer was for $ 7 in cash and unspecified StatesWest securities valued at $ 3 a share . 
Based on the number of Mesa shares outstanding not already owned by StatesWest , the proposed takeover would have a value of about $ 15.3 million . 
StatesWest owns 7.25 % of Mesa . 
Last week , Mesa rejected a general proposal from StatesWest that the two carriers combine . 
In response to the specific offer , Gary Risley , Mesa vice president , said management will ask directors to employ a financial consultant to advise them . 
Hawker Siddeley Group PLC , a U.K. engineering company , reported a 16 % jump in pretax profit for the six-month period ending June 30 . 
Pretax profit rose to # 93.2 million ( $ 146.8 million ) from # 80.6 million ( $ 127 million ) , matching analysts ' expectations , which ranged from # 90 million to # 95 million . 
Profit after taxes and minority interests increased 16 % to # 55.2 million from # 47.6 million in the year-earlier period , while earnings per share rose 16 % to 27.9 pence ( 44 cents ) from 24.1 pence ( 38 cents ) . 
Hawker Siddeley said its core electrical products division enjoyed strong growth , with a 20 % rise in operating profit during the period . 
Fleet / Norstar Financial Group reported a 12 % increase in net income in the third quarter , led by a 43 % gain in its financial services group . 
Fleet 's net was $ 96.4 million , or 86 cents a primary share , compared with $ 85.8 million , or 79 cents a share , a year earlier . 
The Providence , R.I. , financial services group , which includes commercial-credit , leasing and mortgage-banking operations , contributed $ 30.6 million to net , up from last year 's $ 21.3 million . 
Fleet also noted that , unlike other banking companies in the Northeast , it has been only marginally hurt by nonperforming loans that have resulted from the slumping regional real estate market . 
Fleet reported nine-month net of $ 279.0 million , or $ 2.51 a primary share , up from $ 248.2 million , or $ 2.28 a share , a year earlier . 
Benj . Franklin Federal Savings & Loan Association said it expects to post a third-quarter net loss of about $ 8 million , or $ 1.04 a share , as a result of adding $ 11 million in loan-loss reserves . 
The Portland , Ore. , thrift , which has $ 5.2 billion of assets , had net income in last year 's third quarter of $ 1.8 million , or 23 cents a share . 
Franklin said it expects to report earnings for the latest quarter next week . 
The additional reserves relate to possible write-downs of certain assets held by Franklin and its subsidiaries and the default of a bond in its investment portfolio , the thrift said . 
According to a spokeswoman , they also relate to changes Franklin will have to make in its accounting procedures to comply with new federal capitalization requirements for thrifts . 
The company 's shares closed yesterday at $ 4.25 , off 25 cents , in national over-the-counter trading . 
Arkla Inc. said that as part of a program to improve profitability it will take a total of $ 189 million in after-tax charges by year end . 
It also announced an initial public offering of 18 % of its gas exploration and production subsidiary . 
The Shreveport , La. , natural gas company said the charges , though partially offset by a one-time gain from the offering , will result in a full-year after-tax loss . 
Last year , the company had net income of $ 117.3 million , or $ 1.30 a share . 
Arkla said it will report $ 179 milllion in one-time charges against continuing operations for the third quarter , reflecting settlement of certain natural gas contracts . 
It said it will take a $ 10 million fourth-quarter charge against discontinued operations , reflecting certain write-downs and the planned sale of a unit . 
Arkla said its initial offering of 18 % of Arkla Exploration Co. is expected to result in a net gain of about $ 90 million , which will be used to pay down Arkla debt . 
Arkla Exploration owns sizable gas and crude-oil reserves in the South and Southwest . 
South Africa negotiated a new debt agreement with its major foreign creditors for about $ 8 billion of its foreign debt outstanding , said Chris Stals , governor of the Reserve Bank and the country 's chief debt negotiator . 
The new agreement will last for 3 1\/2 years starting July 1 , 1990 , when the current agreement expires . 
The announcement coincides with the start of the Commonwealth Ministers Conference in Kuala Lumpur , where proposals for renewed sanctions against South Africa , including moves to block settling of a new debt agreement , were scheduled to be discussed . 
As with the previous pact , the new agreement covers the country 's debt `` inside the net , '' which applies mainly to repayments due to overseas creditor banks by the private sector . 
The agreement calls for South African debtors to make repayments in eight installments , starting in December of next year . 
The redemption then would be at 1.5 % of the total debt , increasing to 2.5 % in February 1991 , and to 3 % at six-month intervals thereafter . 
A revised provision would be included for the conversion of short-term claims inside the net to long-term loans outside the net . 
These claims would be repayable over a 10-year period . 
Foreign debt falling outside the net of affected indebtedness -- which Mr. Stahl estimated at $ 12 billion -- would remain not subject to the debt arrangements . 
New York Times Co. said net income rose in the third quarter because of a one-time gain on the sale of the company 's cable-TV system . 
Net surged to $ 210.8 million , or $ 2.68 a share , from $ 26.7 million , or 33 cents a share , a year earlier . 
The latest quarter included a gain of $ 193.3 million , or $ 2.46 a share , from the sale of New York Times Cable , completed in August . 
Exclusive of the gain , operating profit declined 35 % to $ 16.4 million , or 21 cents a share , from $ 25.2 million , or 31 cents a share . 
The decline primarily reflected the dilution from acquiring McCall 's , Golf World ( U.S. ) and Sailing World magazines ; lower equity earnings from the forest-products group because of price discounting and an unfavorable exchange rate , and an 8.7 % decline in advertising linage at the New York Times , the company 's flagship newspaper . 
Advertising volume at the company 's 35 regional newspapers decreased 1.1 % . 
The company said the negative factors are expected to continue into next year . 
Revenue rose 6.4 % to $ 415.3 million from $ 390.5 million . 
Democrat Gene Taylor won a special election to fill the congressional seat vacated by the death of Republican Larkin Smith , taking back the GOP 's lone redoubt in Mississippi 's House delegation . 
Mr. Taylor 's overwhelming victory against Republican Tom Anderson reclaims a seat the Republicans had held for 17 years and gives the Democrats their fifth victory in the seven special House elections held this year . 
Mr. Taylor , a 36-year-old state senator from Bay St. Louis , won 65 % of the vote in a district that has voted Republican in the past five presidential elections and that was once represented by Republican U.S. Sen. Trent Lott . 
Mr. Taylor 's victory was an embarrassment for both state and national Republicans . 
Mr. Anderson , a former Lott aide , received campaign assistance from the senator and from President Bush , who visited the district last week . 
Even so , Mr. Taylor carried all but one of the district 's dozen counties . 
Rep. Smith died in a plane crash on Aug. 13 . 
Wall Street Journal reporters called companies with headquarters or facilities in the Bay area in a bid to assess the damage to their operations caused by Tuesday 's earthquake . 
The calls reached many , but certainly not all , of the publicly held companies with operations in the area . 
In most cases damage to company facilities and operations was minimal . 
ADIA SERVICES INC. , Menlo Park , temporary personnel agency , annual sales of $ 504 million , OTC , said all 30 offices in Bay area were working , but in various states of disarray . 
Business was slow because many companies were closed yesterday . 
ADVANCED MICRO DEVICES INC. , Sunnyvale , integrated circuit maker , annual sales of $ 1.12 billion , NYSE , had only minor structural damage . 
Most of its 4,500 workers were at work yesterday , and no production slowdown was anticipated as long as electricity remains available . 
AMDAHL CORP. , Sunnyvale , computer maker , annual sales of $ 1.8 billion , Amex , was closed yesterday and no damage estimates were available . 
AMERICAN BUILDING MAINTENANCE INDUSTRIES Inc. , San Francisco , provider of maintenance services , annual revenue of $ 582 million , NYSE , had some damage to headquarters and lost phone service , but operations were moved to a branch office and are running smoothly thanks to a decentralized computer system the company had developed before the quake . 
AMERICAN PRESIDENT COS. , Oakland , shipping concern , annual sales of $ 2.2 billion , NYSE , had little damage to the cranes , dock or rail track at its container-ship facility near the collapsed Route 880 overpass . 
The company expects to work a ship due in today with minimal delays , despite sporadic power . 
ANACOMP INC. , Indianapolis , NYSE , said its Xidex Corp. unit , a Sunnyvale maker of computer disks and microfilm with annual sales of $ 637 million , had only minor damage and is fully operational . 
ANTHEM ELECTRONICS INC. , San Jose , distributor of electronic parts , annual sales of about $ 300 million , NYSE , sustained very little damage , anticipated being `` in 100 % operating condition '' by midday . 
APPLE COMPUTER CO. , Cupertino , computer maker , annual sales of $ 4.07 billion , OTC , sustained some structural damage . 
Offices were closed yesterday . 
APPLIED MATERIALS INC. , Santa Clara , maker of computer-chip machine systems , annual sales of $ 490 million , OTC , had slight damage to headquarters , no damage to manufacturing plants . 
Company , with 1,750 workers in area , is fully functional . 
ATARI CORP. , Sunnyvale , maker of personal computers and software , annual sales of $ 700 million , Amex , had minor damage and expects to be fully operational by tomorrow . 
BANKAMERICA Corp. , San Francisco , bank holding company , annual revenue of $ 10.2 billion , NYSE , yesterday had no power at its headquarters , 80 of its 433 Northern California branches were closed and 250 of 750 automatic teller machines were closed in the area . 
Securities trading was conducted in a backup facility in Concord . 
BECHTEL CORP. , San Francisco , engineering and construction concern , annual sales of $ 4 billion , had only minor structural damage at its three buildings in the city , but its computers were knocked out . 
Backup computer tapes were hand-carried to an IBM office in Philadelphia , and the company expects its mainframe to be up in a few days . 
Workers , except for senior management , were asked not to report for work yesterday . 
BIO-RAD LABORATORIES INC. , Hercules , biological research and clinical-products leader , $ 200 million in annual sales , Amex , said its Richmond warehouse north of San Francisco was closed because of debris and fallen shelves . 
It expects to be fully operational by next week . 
BORLAND INTERNATIONAL , Scotts Valley , personal computer and software designer , annual sales of $ 72 million , had heavy damage to its headquarters and was conducting business from its parking lot . 
The company does n't expect any shipping delays . 
BUSINESSLAND INC. , San Jose , computer retail company , annual sales of $ 1.1 billion , NYSE , said all 16 corporate office and stores in the area were open with the exception of a retail center in San Francisco 's business district . 
That facility should reopen today . 
CARTER HAWLEY HALE STORES Inc. , Los Angeles , retailer , annual sales of $ 2.79 billion , NYSE , said nine of its 22 Emporium stores in the area were closed because of water damage , broken windows and fallen displays . 
A spokesman said sales are expected to be hurt , but the losses are covered by insurance . 
CHEVRON CORP. , San Francisco , oil company , annual sales of $ 25.2 billion , NYSE , had minor damage to downtown headquarters , but structural damage closed two of its seven buildings in San Ramone industrial park . 
Company expects to be fully operational by next week . 
CLOROX Co. , Oakland , consumer products , annual sales of $ 1.36 billion , NYSE , was closed yesterday but plans to reopen today or tomorrow . 
Meanwhile , orders are being routed through Kingsford Products unit in Louisville , Ky. , but computer problems mean they must be processed manually . 
Expects to be fully operational early next week . 
COHERENT INC. , Palo Alto , laser maker , annual sales of $ 159 million , was closed yesterday but expects to reopen today . 
CONSOLIDATED FREIGHTWAYS INC. , Menlo Park , trucking company , $ 2.69 billion in annual sales , NYSE , had structural damage to CF Motor Freight subsidiary 's office in Palo Alto , no damage in Menlo Park . 
COOPER COMPANIES INC. , Palo Alto , medical products maker , annual sales of $ 628 million , NYSE , had little damage and was in full operation yesterday . 
DAYTON HUDSON CORP. , Minneapolis , retailer , annual sales of $ 12.2 billion , NYSE , closed seven of its 13 Bay-area Target discount stores and nine of its 20 Mervyn 's department stores because of pending reviews by structural engineers or requests from authorities , who were trying to keep shoppers off the freeways . 
The company expects to reopen three Target stores and all but two Mervyn 's today or tomorrow . 
DIASONICS INC. , South San Francisco , maker of magnetic resonance imaging equipment , annual sales of $ 281 million , Amex , had minor damage , mostly in a stockroom . 
The company plans to be fully operational today . 
DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP. , Maynard , Mass. , computer maker , annual sales of $ 12.7 billion , NYSE , had structural damage at its San Francisco sales office but no appreciable damage elsewhere in the area , including its Cupertino plant . 
DREYER'S GRAND ICE CREAM INC. , Oakland , ice cream maker , annual sales of $ 225 million , OTC , said it is delivering ice cream wherever roads are passable . 
EVEREX SYSTEMS INC. , Fremont , maker of personal computers and peripherals , annual sales of $ 377 million , OTC , had minor damage and was almost fully operational yesterday . 
EXXON Corp. , New York , oil company , NYSE , said its refinery northeast of San Francisco was operating at a slightly reduced rate as a precaution in case of aftershocks . 
FORD MOTOR CO. , Dearborn , Mich. , auto maker , annual sales of $ 92.4 billion , NYSE , said its three Ford Aerospace unit facilities in the Bay area , including a satellite-assembly operation in Palo Alto , had no major damage . 
GAP Inc. , San Bruno , clothing retailer , annual sales of $ 1.25 billion , NYSE , expects most of its stores to return to full operation and all 2,500 of its Bay-area workers to be back at work by today . 
GENENTECH INC. , South San Francisco , biotechnology company , annual sales of $ 334.8 million , NYSE , sustained no major damage and expects to be fully operational today . 
GENERAL ELECTRIC CO. , Fairfield , Conn. , consumer , industrial products and broadcasting concern , annual sales of $ 50 billion , NYSE , said its GE Nuclear Energy unit , with 1,600 Bay-area employees , had only minor damage at its San Jose headquarters . 
Business was n't disrupted . 
GENERAL MOTORS CORP. , Detroit , auto maker , annual sales of $ 123.6 billion , NYSE , sustained about 10 injuries to workers and some ruptured water mains at its New United Motor Manufacturing Inc. facility in Fremont , a joint venture with Toyota Motor Corp . 
There was limited production of some models yesterday , but it was n't clear when the normal 750-car-a-day pace will resume . 
Plant officials are still assessing damage to parts suppliers and Port of Oakland facilities that handle shipments to the plant . 
GOLDEN WEST FINANCIAL CORP. , Oakland , savings and loan , annual revenue of $ 1.4 billion , NYSE , had only minor damage to a few branches and no injured employees . 
HEWLETT-PACKARD Co. , Palo Alto , personal computer and electronic equipment maker , annual sales of $ 9.8 billion , NYSE , said there will be a `` minimal suspension '' of manufacturing for an undefined period . 
The computer system was operating , so orders could be taken . 
The company has 18,000 employees and more than 70 buildings in the Bay area . 
One building in Palo Alto may be damaged beyond repair . 
Others had lesser damage and there were no injuries among workers . 
Damage will be `` easily in the millions , '' the company said . 
HEXCEL Corp. , Dublin , manufacturer of engineered parts , annual sales of $ 399 million , NYSE , had little damage beyond some phone trouble . 
HOMESTAKE MINING CO. , San Francisco , gold and general miner , annual sales of $ 432.6 million , NYSE , said its headquarters was closed yesterday because of power failures and lack of water , but that it may reopen today . 
It expects any impact on its business to be slight . 
HOMESTEAD FINANCIAL CORP. , Millbrae , financial services concern , annual revenue of $ 562 million , OTC , said three of its 17 Bay-area branches were closed yesterday . 
The company expects all branches to reopen today . 
INMAC CORP. , Santa Clara , maker of computer accessories , annual sales of $ 250 million , OTC , said telephones were out at its headquarters but service should be restored by today . 
The company said it was doing a brisk business in computer power-surge protectors , cables and uninterruptable power sources . 
INTEL Corp. , Santa Clara , semiconductor maker , annual sales of $ 2.87 billion , OTC , had some damage and few people were at work yesterday . 
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES Corp , Armonk , N.Y. , maker of business machines , NYSE , said flooding caused by broken water pipes closed its San Jose plant , which makes high-end data-storage devices . 
The plant and its 8,500 employees gradually will resume operations over the next several days , the company said . 
Also closed yesterday were the company 's Santa Teresa software-development lab and the Almaden research center . 
The concern 's National Service Division opened a center for emergency service in Walnut Creek as part of its disaster-recovery plan . 
KAISER ALUMINUM & CHEMICAL , Oakland , metal and chemical maker , annual sales of $ 2.22 billion , had slight structural damage to its 28-story headquarters building and employees stayed home yesterday to allow crews to clean up . 
LOCKHEED CORP. , Calabasas , aerospace and defense concern , annual sales of $ 10.59 billion , NYSE , said its Lockheed Missiles & Space division closed its Santa Cruz test facility because of power outages and landslides . 
The closing , affecting 266 employees , will continue at least until roads are cleared . 
It was n't known to what extent , if any , the facility was damaged . 
It also was n't known what the impact will be on the division 's work , which includes the Navy 's Trident submarine-based missile program and the Air Force 's Strategic Defense Initiative . 
The division had only minor damage at its Sunnyvale headquarters and plant in Palo Altos , and no delays in deliveries are expected . 
LONGS DRUG STORES INC. , Walnut Creek , drugstore chain , annual sales of $ 1.9 billion , NYSE , had only minor damage and only four of its 75 Bay-area stores , all in the Santa Cruz area , were closed . 
All are expected to reopen soon . 
LSI LOGIC CORP. , Milpitas , maker of customized integrated circuits , annual sales of $ 550 million , NYSE , has halted manufacturing at its three plants in the area while they are inspected for structural damage . 
The company expects to resume full operations by today . 
R.H. MACY & Co. , New York , retailer , annual sales of $ 7 billion , said there was minor damage to its 24 Macy stores and nine I. Magnin stores in the Bay area . 
MEASUREX CORP. , Cupertino , maker of computer integrated manufacturing processes , annual sales of $ 265 million , NYSE , had only minor damage but workers spent most of yesterday cleaning up . 
NATIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR CORP. , Santa Clara , semiconductor maker , annual sales of $ 1.65 billion , NYSE , said it had no major structural damage at its 30 Bay-area buildings , but two workers were injured . 
Production resumed yesterday . 
Piping in a waste-treatment plant needed immediate repairs . 
NORDSTROM INC. , Seattle , retailer , annual sales $ 2.33 billion , OTC , five of this 59-store chain 's nine stores in the Bay Area were closed yesterday , damage appears primarily cosmetic , hopes to reopen four of the stores by today and the fifth by Saturday . 
ORACLE SYSTEMS CORP. , Belmont , provider of computer programming and software services , annual sales $ 584 million , four of 12 offices and buildings in the Belmont and San Mateo areas were closed , 95 % of computer and telephone systems are operating , expects to be back to full operation by the end of the week . 
PACIFIC GAS & ELECTRIC CO. , San Francisco , electric , gas and water supplier , annual sales $ 7.6 billion , some minor damage to headquarters , undetermined damage to four nearby substations , severe structural damage to a major power plant at Moss Landing , extensive damage to gas lines and electric lines , 400,000 residences without electricity and 69,000 without gas , can not reconnect electricity until it is certain there are no gas leaks , no predictions on when this will happen . 
PACIFIC TELESIS GROUP , San Francisco , telecommunications holding company , annual sales of $ 9.5 billion , no damage to headquarters , but no power , the power failure has caused a delay in the release of the company 's earnings report , major concern is subsidiaries , Pacific Bell and Pacific Telesis Cellular , both of which sustained damage to buildings , structural damage to several cellular sites in Santa Cruz , volume of calls on cellular phones 10 times the usual , causing a big slowdown . 
PROCTER & GAMBLE CO. , Cincinnati-based company 's Folgers Coffee plant in South San Francisco was closed following the earthquake , no injuries or major damage , other plants around country can make up for any lost production . 
QUANTUM CORP. , Milpitas , manufactures rigid disc drives for small business computers , word processors , annual sales $ 120.8 million , OTC , open for business , minor structural damage . 
RAYCHEM CORP. , Menlo Park , plastics manufacturer , annual sales $ 1 billion , no major damage and no production slowdown is anticipated . 
ROSS STORES INC. , Newark , discount apparel chain , annual sales $ 576 million , two of 28 stores in Bay Area closed , both could open as early as today . 
SAFEWAY STORES INC. , Oakland , retail food chain , annual sales of $ 13.6 billion , some structural damage to headquarters and no power ; major problems transporting products to those stores that remained open ; no numbers on how many stores closed . 
CHARLES SCHWAB & CO. , San Francisco , discount brokerage firm , annual sales of $ 392 million , had only minor damage to headquarters building and was up and running for yesterday 's market open . 
Firm will not , however , resume 24-hour service until power in city is restored . 
Office closed yesterday at 4:30 p.m. EDT . 
SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY , Scotts Valley , maker of hard disk drives for computers , annual sales of $ 1.37 billion , OTC , closed to assess what appeared to be minor damage to some of its 20 buildings . 
SOUTHERN PACIFIC TRANSPORTATION CO. , San Francisco , railroad , annual sales of $ 2.41 billion , had only minor damage to headquarters and tracks , and expects to be fully operational tomorrow . 
St. Louis Southwestern Railway Co. unit halted all service Tuesday night but has since restored some freight lines and limited commuter service between San Francisco and San Jose . 
SUN MICROSYSTEMS INC. , Mountain View , maker of desktop computers , annual sales $ 1.77 billion , OTC , no injured employees and very little damage to buildings . 
Closed yesterday due to power difficulties . 
TANDEM COMPUTERS INC. , Cupertino , computer maker , annual sales of $ 1.6 billion , NYSE , said it had no significant damage and should be fully operational within a week . 
Many employees stayed home yesterday , but customer service was being maintained . 
TRANSAMERICA CORP. , San Francisco , financial services and insurance company , annual sales of $ 7.9 billion , NYSE , said its headquarters , the well-known downtown pyramid-shaped building , was intact but closed yesterday . 
VARIAN ASSOCIATES INC. , Palo Alto , instrumentation and semiconductor equipment company , annual sales of $ 1.3 billion , had only minor damage and no slowdowns were anticipated . 
VLSI TECHNOLOGY INC. , San Jose , maker of semiconductor products , annual sales $ 171.9 million , OTC , minimal damage to facilities , no injuries , expected operations to return to normal late yesterday . 
WATKINS-JOHNSON CO. , defense-oriented electronics manufacturer , annual sales $ 292 million , NYSE , minor damage to headquarters and plant in Palo Alto , no damage to San Jose plant , `` still assessing '' damage at Scotts Valley plant , where main product is furnaces for semiconductor production . 
WELLS FARGO & CO. , San Francisco , bank holding company , annual revenue $ 4.9 billion , NYSE , minor damage at headquarters , 12 branches out of 170 in Northern California sustained structural damage that will preclude them from opening in the near future , 45 locations with at least one automatic teller machine inoperable , central computer systems are operating , no injuries . 
WYSE TECHNOLOGY INC. , San Jose , maker of video display terminals and workstations and IBM / PC compatible computers , annual sales of $ 452 million , slight structural damage at headquarters , no injuries , expects to be back to full operation today . 
3COM CORP. , Santa Clara , maker of computer communications systems , annual sales of $ 386 million , OTC , slight structural damage to headquarters , communications systems already fully operational . 
Could the collapse of I-880 have been prevented ? 
That was the question structural engineers and California transportation officials were asking themselves yesterday as rescue workers began the gruesome task of trying to extract as many as 250 victims from beneath the concrete slabs of the double-deck Nimitz Freeway in Oakland that caved in during Tuesday 's temblor . 
After touring the area , California Gov. George Deukmejian late yesterday called for an inquiry into the freeway 's collapse , blaming the disaster on substandard construction , the Associated Press reported . 
The impact of the destruction of this 2.5-mile stretch of highway was tragically measured in lost lives . 
But there are other long-term effects that raise serious questions about the ability of California 's infrastructure to withstand a major temblor . 
It could easily be two years before the well-traveled artery that helps connect Oakland with San Francisco is reopened , and the cost to build a new stretch of highway could soar to more than $ 250 million , said Charles J. O'Connell , deputy district director in Los Angeles of the California Department of Transportation , nicknamed Caltrans . 
Caltrans in Sacramento said total damage from the collapsed highway is estimated at around $ 500 million . 
The aftershocks of the highway tragedy are reverberating in Los Angeles as well , as local politicians spoke yesterday against plans to bring double-decking to Los Angeles freeways by 1994 . 
Caltrans plans to add a second deck for buses and car pools above the median of a 2.5-mile stretch of the Harbor Freeway just south of Los Angeles , near the Memorial Coliseum . 
Los Angeles County Supervisor Kenneth Hahn yesterday vowed to fight the introduction of double-decking in the area . 
Caltrans abandoned double-decking in the early 1970s , following the 1971 Sylmar earthquake that destroyed freeway sections just north of Los Angeles , Mr. O'Connell explained . 
That temblor measured 6.1 on the Richter scale ; Tuesday 's was 
So why even consider stacking freeways now ? 
`` We 've run out of places to build freeways in L.A. , and the only place to go is up , '' Mr. O'Connell said , although he acknowledges there are many obstacles , including cost . 
But as for safety , he says double-deck freeways built today with the heavily reinforced concrete and thicker columns required after the Sylmar quake should withstand a calamitous temblor of 7.5 to 8 on the Richter scale . 
Reasons for the collapse of the Nimitz Freeway were sketchy yesterday . 
But most structural engineers attributed the destruction to improper reinforcement of the columns that supported the decks , and the fact that the ground beneath the highway is largely landfill and can become unstable , or `` liquefy , '' in a major quake . 
The two-story roadway , designed in the mid-1940s and completed in 1957 , was supported by columns that apparently lacked the kind of steel reinforcement used in highways today . 
While the pillars did have long metal bars running vertically through them for reinforcement , they apparently lacked an adequate number of metal `` ties '' that run horizontally through the column , said Leo Parker , a structural engineer in Los Angeles . 
Caltrans today uses a variation of the design Mr. Parker describes , with spiraling steel rods inside . 
But in the case of the Nimitz Freeway , the lack of such support caused the core of the columns to crumble and buckle under the weight of the second deck , crushing motorists who were lined up in bumper-to-bumper rush-hour traffic on the lower deck nearly 15 feet below . 
Officials of the state agency did n't have any immediate explanation why the reinforcement did n't hold up . 
Caltrans reinforced the highway in 1977 as part of a $ 55 million statewide project , using steel cables to tie the decks of the freeway to the columns and prevent the structure from swaying in a quake . 
Caltrans spokesman Jim Drago in Sacramento declined to identify the engineering firm that did the reinforcement work . 
Liability in the bridge and road collapses will revolve around whether government took `` reasonable care '' to build and maintain the structures , says John Messina , a Tacoma , Wash. , personal-injury attorney who specializes in highway design and maintenance cases . 
The firm brought in to strengthen the structure could be liable as well . 
The results of the quake certainly raise questions about whether reasonable care was taken , Mr. Messina says . 
Given the seismic history of the Bay Area , `` it seems to me that a 6.9 earthquake is a foreseeable event . '' 
Caltrans ' Mr. Drago defended the agency 's work on the Nimitz Freeway . 
`` The work was done properly , '' he said . 
`` Basically , we had a severe earthquake of significant duration and it was just something the structure could n't withstand . '' 
Ironically , Caltrans this year began working on a second round of seismic reinforcements of freeways around the state , this time wrapping freeway columns in `` steel blankets '' to reinforce them . 
But only bridges supported with single rows of columns were top priority , and the Nimitz Freeway , supported by double rows , was left out , Mr. Drago explained . 
`` The reason is that the technology is such that we 're not able to retrofit multi-column structures , '' he said . 
Charles McCoy in San Francisco and John R. Emshwiller in Los Angeles contributed to this article . 
Lionel Corp. 's board unanimously rejected a tender offer of $ 8 a share , or $ 95.4 million , for as much as 90 % of Lionel by a group with a 9.9 % stake in the toy retailer . 
Lionel also urged holders of its stock and debt not to tender their securities , saying it wants to remain independent to pursue its business strategy . 
Lionel also said the offer by Robert I. Toussie Limited Partnership is inadequate , and full of conditions that leave it `` subject to substantial uncertainty . '' 
In addition , Lionel began a lawsuit in federal District Court in New York seeking to enjoin the offer , alleging , among other things , violations of federal securities law and fraudulent manipulation of the market for Lionel 's securities . 
Robert I. Toussie , general partner of the investment group , said the Lionel response reflected management 's entrenched position , saying officials had failed to come up with a better alternative to his group 's offer . 
Mr. Toussie said he would respond to Lionel 's suit after his lawyers review it . 
Efforts by a federal mediator to reignite talks between Boeing Co. and the Machinists union apparently failed , and no further meetings are scheduled . 
Company officials and union representatives did n't meet face to face , but the mediator shuttled between the two groups . 
In a statement issued after the meeting , the aerospace giant said it wo n't increase its offer although adjustments within the proposed pay-and-benefit mix are possible . 
Machinists already have rejected a proposal that called for a 4 % pay increase and 8 % bonus in the first year . 
In the second year , workers would receive a 3 % wage boost and a 3 % bonus , followed by a 3 % increase without a bonus in the third year . 
`` The company will not budge on anything , '' said a spokesman for the union . 
As the strike enters its 15th day today , some members are getting nervous , the spokesman conceded , but the majority of the 55,000 Machinists are prepared to `` wait it out as long as it takes . 
United Merchants & Manufacturers Inc. said its president , Uzi Ruskin , withdrew his proposal to acquire control of the New York textile and clothing company . 
Last month , Mr. Ruskin proposed , among other things , to buy 3.5 million shares , or 38 % , for $ 4 apiece . 
Coupled with his current 1.2 million shares and 4 % held by an associate , the stake would have given him control of 55 % of the concern . 
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing , Mr. Ruskin had said that holders of the other 45 % of United Merchants would receive one-half share of a new preferred stock for each of their shares . 
A special committee of United Merchants directors said that in view of uncertainties regarding various legal and financial considerations , it could n't recommend the plan to the full board . 
The company is exploring , with a major financial institution , the development of a plan to boost the value of the company for its holders , Mr. Ruskin said . 
In a separate SEC filing , Albert Safer , who holds 6.46 % of United Merchants , said he retained investment bank Lazard Freres & Co. for advice as he evaluates the possibility of making a bid for the textile maker . 
On Friday , Mr. Safer , a Newark , N.J. , textile businessman , signed a confidentiality agreement under which United Merchants would provide him with nonpublic information . 
The White House is making sure nobody will accuse it of taking this crisis lightly . 
In the aftermath of the California earthquake , President Bush and his aides flew into a whirlwind of earthquake-related activity yesterday morning . 
Some of it was necessary to get federal help flowing to victims , but some seemed designed mostly to project an image of a White House in action . 
Mr. Bush and his aides were accused of responding too slowly after the Exxon Valdez oil tanker split open in Alaskan waters and Hurricane Hugo struck the Carolina coast , and they clearly do n't want a repeat of those charges now . 
So the White House announced that Mr. Bush got his first earthquake briefing of the day at 6:30 a.m. from chief of staff John Sununu . 
By noon , Mr. Bush had taken two phone calls from Vice President Dan Quayle , who was in California ; made a televised statement of concern ; signed a disaster proclamation ; received a written report from the Federal Emergency Management Agency ; and visited FEMA headquarters . 
Mr. Bush himself essentially acknowledged that he and his aides were trying to head off criticism . 
On his FEMA visit , Mr. Bush said that he hoped there would be `` less carping '' about the emergency office 's performance this time , adding that the agency `` took a hit '' for its reaction to Hurricane Hugo . 
The White House already is talking of Mr. Bush visiting the California earthquake site this weekend . 
He visited the Hugo devastation but not until after local leaders urged him to do so . 
Beazer PLC , a major British building materials and construction concern , reported a 24 % jump in pretax profit for its latest financial year , helped largely by contributions from its U.S. unit , Koppers Co . 
Pretax profit for the year to June 30 rose to # 142.5 million ( $ 224.5 million ) from # 114.7 million ( $ 180.7 million ) , broadly matching analysts ' expectations . 
Profit after taxes and minority interests but before extraordinary items increased 22 % to # 92.6 million from # 75.6 million a year earlier , while fully diluted earnings per share rose to 29.90 pence ( 47 cents ) from 24.68 pence ( 39 cents ) . 
The lethal shudders that wracked the San Francisco Bay Area -- rated a 6.9 on the Richter scale -- did n't match the great earthquake of 1906 , rated at 8.25 . 
The difference of just 1.35 points on the scale , designed by Charles Richter of CalTech in the 1930s , means the older quake was `` 10 to 20 times stronger , '' says Lane Johnson , director of the University of California Berkeley Seismographic Station . 
The ground ruptured along a 20-to-30-mile stretch of the San Andreas Fault on Tuesday , Mr. Johnson added . 
In 1906 , the rupture was 300 miles long and a couple feet wide . 
Though the epicenter of Tuesday 's temblor was located 10 miles north of the town of Santa Cruz , and 50 miles south of San Francisco , its havoc hopscotched up the coast in seemingly random fashion . 
But the greatest damage was visited on buildings and roadways perched upon landfill , as were the Marina District of San Francisco and the Bay Bridge -- two areas of maximum devastation . 
`` Landfill -- loose and unconsolidated earth -- may feel like rock but it behaves like liquid when you shake it , '' said Douglas Segar , professor of geosciences at San Francisco State University in a televised interview . 
`` It liquefies in a patchwork quilt pattern . 
Our quake behaved much like the Mexico City earthquake , where great damage was miles from the epicenter . '' 
Mr. Johnson , of the Berkeley seismographic station , said : `` Landfill can be done if it 's properly compacted . 
You can drive piles on it and build on it . '' 
He cited the example of San Francisco 's financial district , where many new glass towers survived almost unscathed . 
But the public policy issues raised by earthquake damage will be difficult to address , Mr. Johnson predicted . 
`` The attention span of the public is short , '' he said . 
`` We 've known for years and years we 've got lots of old { pre-1950s } unreinforced brick and masonry buildings . '' 
One old building , the Golden State Bank Building on Front Street , had its yellow brick facade sheared off by the shock of the quake , leaving a wedge of its third floor open to the air , while piles of dusty bricks tumbled to the street below narrowly missing rush-hour pedestrians and cars . 
Reinforcing such old building stock , Mr. Johnson said , `` comes down to money . 
It 's a danger . 
We know it 's there . 
And sooner or later , we have to do something about it . '' 
The urgency is heightened because this week 's earthquake -- while major and followed by hundreds of aftershocks -- did n't release enough pent-up energy tension along the faultlines to preclude more and bigger quakes soon . 
`` The big one is still due , '' Mr. Johnson predicted in an interview . 
`` The Bay Area has three very dangerous faults , the San Andreas , the Hayward fault and the Calaveras fault . 
It { Tuesday 's quake } has n't solved our problem . 
In California , this is the reality . 
Coca-Cola Co. may be about to intensify the cola wars . 
Coke said it will test market a caffeine-free version of its flagship brand , Coca-Cola Classic , beginning next week in Charlotte , N.C . 
Other , as yet unnamed , cities will follow . 
If all goes well , the product will be rolled out for national sales sometime next year , a Coke spokesman said . 
After the confusion surrounding the change of the Coke formula in 1985 , Coca-Cola was reluctant to clutter the Classic name with a brand extension . 
But now , the soft-drink giant appears willing to take the risk . 
`` The name Classic Coke has tremendous value , and they have n't merchandised that name before , '' says Jesse Meyers , publisher of the trade journal Beverage Digest . 
The Coke spokesman said a caffeine-free Classic should help increase volume of the original brand . 
Indeed , analysts have said that the absence of new products , among other factors , has limited sales growth throughout the industry . 
Coke now leads Pepsi in market share in caffeine-free diet colas but trails Pepsi in sales of caffeine-free sugared colas , according to Beverage Digest . 
Coke introduced a caffeine-free sugared cola based on its original formula in 1983 . 
It switched to a caffeine-free formula using its new Coke in 1985 . 
Coke has been studying the possibility of introducing a caffeine-free Classic for a year , a company spokesman said . 
He said large increases in sales of other non-caffeine soft drinks make the timing right now . 
CALIFORNIA STRUGGLED with the aftermath of a Bay area earthquake . 
As aftershocks shook the San Francisco Bay area , rescuers searched through rubble for survivors of Tuesday 's temblor , and residents picked their way through glass-strewn streets . 
In Oakland , hopes faded for finding any more survivors within the concrete and steel from the collapse of an interstate highway . 
At least 270 people were reported killed and 1,400 injured in the rush-hour tremor that caused billions of dollars of damage along 100 miles of the San Andreas fault . 
Bush declared the region a major disaster area and the military was mobilized to prevent looting . 
The baseball commissioner said the third game of the World Series between the Giants and the Athletics would be played Tuesday in Candlestick Park . 
HONECKER WAS OUSTED as leader of East Germany amid growing unrest . 
The 77-year-old official , who oversaw the building of the Berlin Wall , was removed during a meeting of the 163-member Communist Party Central Committee in East Berlin . 
Honecker , who was reported ill following gall-bladder surgery in August , said he was resigning for health reasons . 
He was succeeded by internal-security chief Egon Krenz , 52 , a hard-liner who quickly ruled out any sharing of power with pro-democracy groups . 
Honecker 's departure came after weeks of street protests and an exodus to the West of East Germans who had become disenchanted with his rule . 
HUNGARY ADOPTED constitutional changes to form a democratic system . 
At a nationally televised legislative session in Budapest , the Parliament overwhelmingly approved changes formally ending one-party domination in the country , regulating free elections by next summer and establishing the office of state president to replace a 21-member council . 
The country was renamed the Republic of Hungary . 
Like other Soviet bloc nations , it had been known as a `` people 's republic '' since 
The voting for new laws followed dissolution of Hungary 's Communist Party this month and its replacement by a Western-style Socialist Party . 
The space shuttle Atlantis blasted into orbit from Cape Canaveral , Fla. , and its crew of five astronauts launched the nuclear-powered Galileo space probe on a flight to the planet Jupiter . 
The $ 1.4 billion robot spacecraft 's exploratory mission is to take six years . 
The shuttle is slated to return Monday to California . 
South Korea 's President Roh addressed a joint House-Senate meeting and urged patience over U.S. demands for the opening of Seoul 's markets to more American goods , saying trade issues would be `` resolved to mutual satisfaction . '' 
He also said tragic results could follow any `` hint of weakening '' of the U.S. defense commitment to Seoul . 
The Census Bureau reported that 13.1 % of the U.S. population , or 31.9 million people , were living in poverty in 1988 . 
Last year 's figure was down from 13.4 % in 1987 and marked the fifth consecutive annual decline in the poverty rate . 
Per capita income rose 1.7 % to $ 13,120 , but median family income fell 0.2 % . 
The Bush administration accused Israeli Prime Minister Shamir of hindering peace efforts in the Mideast with `` unhelpful '' and disappointing statements . 
Shamir said Tuesday that he was prepared to risk a policy conflict with the U.S. over an Egyptian plan to hold direct Israeli-Palestinian talks , which the premier 's Likud bloc opposes . 
Cuba was elected to the U.N. Security Council for the first time since its Castro-led revolution 30 years ago . 
The election was by secret ballot in the General Assembly . 
The U.S. did n't openly oppose Cuba 's seating as the Latin American council delegate . 
Britain 's Prime Minister Thatcher told a Commonwealth summit in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia , that sanctions against South Africa were `` utterly irresponsible , '' officials said . 
But other nations at the opening of the 49-nation meeting of Britain and its former colonies pressed for continued or stronger embargoes in an effort to end apartheid . 
Arab officials in Saudi Arabia said three-week-old talks by Lebanese lawmakers aimed at ending Lebanon 's civil war appeared about to collapse . 
Christian legislators are insisting on a Syrian troop pullout from Lebanon before agreeing to political changes giving the nation 's Moslems a greater role in Beirut 's government . 
Colombia 's judges launched a 72-hour strike to press security demands following Tuesday 's murder of a High Court justice in Medellin . 
The country 's narcotics traffickers claimed responsibility for the slaying . 
Most of the country 's 20,000 judges and judicial employees joined the work stoppage . 
Charles S. Mitchell , a vice president with Homart Development Co. , the real estate development subsidiary of Sears , Roebuck & Co. , was named president of Figgie Properties , a real estate development unit . 
He succeeds William Kohut , who resigned earlier this year . 
Also , Richard A. Barkley , a former marketing executive with FMC Corp. , was appointed president of Continental Container Systems , a producer of can closing machinery that Figgie acquired late last year . 
Figgie is a fire protection , electronics and industrial products concern . 
Dow Chemical Co. said third-quarter net income slipped 6.8 % from a record year-ago quarter . 
The decline broke a streak of 10 quarters in which Dow posted earnings increases . 
Dow 's third-quarter net fell to $ 589 million , or $ 3.29 a share , from $ 632 million , or $ 3.36 a share , a year ago . 
Sales in the latest quarter rose 2 % to $ 4.25 billion from $ 4.15 billion a year earlier . 
Dow closed at $ 94.625 a share , up 75 cents , in New York Stock Exchange composite trading . 
A spokeswoman said Dow is comfortable with Wall Street expectations that full-year earnings will total about $ 14.60 a share , compared with last year 's record net of $ 2.4 billion , or $ 12.76 a share . 
But that signal on full-year profit casts doubt on whether Dow will improve on its year-ago fourth-quarter net of $ 3.44 a share , or $ 635 million . 
Dow would earn $ 14.85 a share for the year if it equaled that year-ago fourth-quarter performance . 
Dow officials were signaling that the company would earn less than $ 15 a share this year even before they announced in July a plan to acquire 67 % of Marion Laboratories Inc . 
That acquisition could further dilute earnings per share this year , the company spokeswoman said . 
Dow has n't said exactly what impact the Marion acquisition will have on 1989 earnings . 
Dow blamed the third-quarter earnings drop on several factors , including softer prices for polyethylene and other basic chemicals , a slower U.S. economy and a stronger dollar , which made Dow 's exports from the U.S. more expensive to overseas customers . 
Another problem was a 7 % increase in operating costs at a time when revenue was rising by only 2 % . 
For the first nine months of the year , Dow earned $ 2.06 billion , or $ 11.41 a share , up 17 % from $ 1.76 billion , or $ 9.32 a share , a year ago . 
Sales for the latest nine months rose 7.7 % to $ 13.34 billion from $ 12.38 billion in the year-ago period . 
Whether or not `` great cases make bad-law '' -- as Justice Holmes asserted -- who can doubt that when great confirmation hearings turn on the nominee 's response to these great cases they make bad judicial history ? 
Ethan Bronner 's `` Battle for Justice : How the Bork Nomination Shook America '' ( Norton , 399 pages , $ 22.50 ) is a spirited narrative of the nastiest of these hearings , done with journalistic verve , but with a flawed legal philosophy . 
While the book amply justifies its subtitle , the title itself is dubious . 
What shook America was not a battle for justice but for naked power , in which an army of judicial activists rolled over a judge they had demonized . 
In its basic structure and style the book is novelistic , with piquant character portrayal , hard-wire action and devious intrigue of the sort more likely to be encountered in a Washington docudrama than in a constitutional history . 
Mr. Bronner seems to believe that the hearings could have gone either way . 
I doubt that . 
Given Democratic frustration with the Reagan victories and Court appointments , the contingency plans in place , and Mr. Bork 's paper trail of vulnerable writings , it was pretty clear that Judge Bork never stood much chance of being confirmed . 
As Mr. Bronner himself says , the smell of `` raw meat '' was in the air . 
Perhaps because they won , Mr. Bork 's attackers come through more vividly than his defenders . 
Ralph Neas was the organizing genius , whipping a conglomerate of pressure groups into an irresistible attacking force . 
Harvard 's Laurence Tribe was the constitutional heavy , laying out legal strategies for the senators and witnesses to follow . 
But it was Ted Kennedy who scored most effectively with his searing portrayal of `` Robert Bork 's America '' -- the parade of imaginary horribles that would follow logically , he claimed , from the positions Mr. Bork had taken over the space of two decades . 
Sen. Kennedy , never mind his dubious credentials for the moral high ground , emoted brilliantly . 
I add two others . 
Republican Sen. Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania engaged the nominee in a verbal contest aimed at showing that Mr. Bork was willing to stretch the Constitution in one area ( free speech ) while remaining rigid in all the others . 
It achieved a good media play , and enabled Sen. Specter and others to vote against Mr. Bork out of `` conscience . '' 
Further ammunition came from left legal theorist Ronald Dworkin , who in the New York Review of Books painted a picture of a constitutional zombie willfully reading his personal prejudices into the Constitution , particularly in the area of `` original intent . '' 
The charge of being `` outside the mainstream '' of legal thought gravely undercut Mr. Bork 's scholarly standing , leaving him bleeding on the platform . 
The nomination still might have been salvaged if a number of Democratic moderates in the South and Southwest had broken party lines . 
But Democratic Sen. Bennett Johnson of Louisiana reminded the little band that anti-Bork blacks and women could furnish the margin to punish them in their next Senate elections . 
Demographics converged with `` mainstream '' and demonizing to seal Robert Bork 's fate . 
The upshot ? 
Mr. Bork 's opponents chose the battlefield , held it and kept it . 
Yet with the smooth confirmation of Anthony Kennedy , an `` 80 percenter '' only slightly less supportive of judicial restraint than Mr. Bork , the Democrats may have won the battle but lost the war . 
Another upshot , however , was the chilling message the Bork hearings sent into the judicial culture from which the Supreme Court draws its talent . 
The word went forth to every law school that those with federal court ambitions must travel a safe constitutional journey , with no paper trail and no bite to their tongue or pen . 
Unfortunately , the author simply does n't supply the philosophical frame to sustain his reportorial talents . 
He has too readily swallowed the case for the activist law school culture . 
Probing more deeply into the doctrine of `` judicial restraint , '' he would have found a long history going back to the great decisions of Justice Holmes . 
He would discover it also in Alexander Bickel , a subtle constitutional scholar , Mr. Bork 's closest friend at Yale , whose influence on the judge goes well beyond Mr. Bronner 's reporting . 
Still , the long view of Robert Bork as constitutional thinker must be a spotty one . 
His strength lies in his majoritarian doctrine , which keeps the Court clear of transient group pressures and leaves most decisions in a democracy to elected legislatures and executives . 
Unfortunately , Mr. Bork failed to distinguish between such pressures and the emergence of great issues critical to a society that must be settled judicially if it is to cohere . 
The question of segregated schools , in Brown vs. Board of Education , was such an issue . 
In our time abortion has become another , best left to a line of Supreme Court decisions rather than to the chaos of 50 state legislatures . 
A reflective and growing consensus of Americans clearly wishes to apply the right to privacy in contraceptive matters ( decided in the Griswold case ) to abortion as well . 
One can understand Mr. Bork 's fear that the new right to privacy will become intolerably stretched , though a Supreme Court composed of men and women with realism , guts and a sense of limits should be able to manage it . 
What is certain is that if Americans allow another happening like the degrading Bork confirmation circus , it will be at their peril . 
Mr. Lerner is a writer and historian living in New York . 
Sotheby 's Inc. , the world 's biggest auction house , is taking a huge Wall Street-style risk on the outcome of the sale of art from the estate of John T. Dorrance Jr. , the Campbell Soup Co. heir . 
The Financial Services division has guaranteed the Dorrance family that it will receive a minimum of $ 100 million for the collection , regardless of what the bids for the art works total , people close to the transaction say . 
The collection , which includes two early Picassos , a van Gogh , a Monet , other paintings , furniture and porcelains , went on sale last night in the first of six auctions . 
What Sotheby 's is doing closely resembles an underwriting by an investment bank . 
A corporation that wants to sell stock or bonds goes to a Wall Street firm , which purchases the securities outright , accepting the financial risk of finding buyers . 
If the investment bank can sell the securities at a higher price than it paid the issuer , it makes a profit . 
At the initial sale last night , for example -- the sale featuring the Impressionists masters -- bids totaled $ 116 million . 
That was slightly above Sotheby 's presale estimate of $ 111 million . 
Normally , Sotheby 's would have earned 20 % of the total in commissions . 
Instead , people familiar with the transaction said , the auction house opted to forgo that percentage in order to obtain the collection and in exchange for taking a bigger chunk of proceeds exceeding $ 100 million . 
Art dealers say that while auction houses occasionally guarantee the seller of a highly desirable work of art a minimum price , a financial commitment of this size is unprecedented . 
Diana D. Brooks , president of Sotheby 's North America division , vehemently denies it offered the Dorrance heirs a money-back guarantee , calling such reports `` inaccurate . '' 
Buried in the glossy hardbound catalog for the sale , however , appears the statement , `` Sotheby 's has an interest in the property in this catalog . '' 
Explains a Sotheby 's spokeswoman , the statement `` means exactly what it says . 
We have some level of financial interest '' in the collection . 
`` We do n't disclose specifics . '' 
Frank Mirabello , a lawyer for the Dorrance estate with the Philadelphia law firm of Morgan , Lewis & Bockius , declines to comment on the financial arrangements . 
Sotheby 's made the $ 100 million guarantee to keep the Dorrance collection away from its archrival , auction house Christie 's International PLC ; Christie 's has handled smaller sales for the Dorrance family over the years . 
When Christie 's officials asked why the firm was n't picked to sell the Dorrance collection , representatives of the Dorrance family `` told us it was a question of financial considerations , '' said Michael Findlay , Christie 's head of impressionist and modern paintings . 
Collectors who have made their money on Wall Street have become an increasingly important part of the art business and their money has helped fuel the art boom , but recently it appears Sotheby 's has been returning the compliment . 
In November 1987 , Sotheby 's essentially offered a Wall Street-style `` bridge loan '' of about $ 27 million to Australian businessman Alan Bond to enable him to purchase Vincent van Gogh 's `` Irises '' for $ 53.9 million . 
It was the highest bid in history for a work of art . 
But two weeks ago , Sotheby 's said that it has the painting under lock and key because the loan had not been fully repaid . 
Sotheby 's is offering such deals because it 's an art sellers ' market , at least where the best works are concerned , says Ralph Lerner , an attorney and author of the book `` Art Law . '' 
`` There seems to be a lot of art for sale , but there 's more competition . 
The competition gives the seller the ability to cut a better deal , '' he says . 
The Dorrance family will still receive a substantial portion of the auction proceeds above $ 100 million , people familiar with the transaction said . 
But it 's likely that Sotheby 's will take a higher than usual commission , called an override , on the amount exceeding the guarantee . 
Sotheby 's has been aggressively promoting the Dorrance sale . 
At a news conference last May announcing plans for the auction , Sotheby 's estimated its value in excess of $ 100 million . 
More recently , Sotheby 's has predicted the collection will fetch $ 140 million . 
That 's the highest estimate for a single collection in auction history . 
The decision to put the entire collection on the block stunned many , since Mr. Dorrance had served as chairman of the Philadelphia Museum of Art , and it had been assumed many of the works would be donated to the institution . 
At last night 's sale , 13 of 44 works that sold were purchased by Aska International Gallery , the art-acquisition unit of Aichi Financial , a Japanese conglomerate that owns 7.5 % of Christie 's . 
Meanwhile , Sotheby 's guarantee is raising eyebrows in the art world . 
`` The consumer has to throw out the idea that the auction house is a disinterested middleman , '' says New York art dealer David Tunick . 
While he adds that he has no problem with auction houses who sell works in which they have a financial interest , `` It ought not to be hidden in some small print . '' 
In such situations , he says , the house `` is going to put the best light on things . '' 
For example , an auction house 's comments on the condition of a work of art that is up for sale should be looked at with `` very open eyes , '' he says . 
`` There 's more and more of this cash-up-front going on at every level , '' says Bruce Miller , president of Art Funding Corp. , an art lender . 
Dealers and auction houses `` know if they do n't lay out a half a million for this , another one will ; it 's that competitive . '' 
In January , two small New York galleries , the Coe Kerr Gallery and Beadleston Fine Arts , snatched a major art collection owned by the Askin family away from rival auction-house bidders with an up-front payment of about $ 25 million . 
A Christie 's spokeswoman said that while the auction house sometimes waives its seller 's commission to attract art works -- it still gets a commission from the buyer -- Christie 's wo n't offer financial guarantees because `` Christie 's believes its primary role is as an auction house , and therefore as an agent { for buyer and seller } , not as a bank . 
Egon Krenz , the man tapped yesterday to become East Germany 's new leader , faces the same task that has fallen to neighboring socialist colleagues : reforming a country in crisis . 
But unlike the other new leaders in the East Bloc , Mr. Krenz will face an immediate threat to his nation 's very existence : German reunification . 
Mr. Krenz , age 52 , is known as an old-guard ironfist , one likely to continue the method of running a country that the Berlin Wall made famous . 
Even if he were to change his stripes and become another Milton Friedman , however , he would still stand a good chance of losing a country . 
Mr. Krenz almost certainly will be a younger version of Erich Honecker , his rigid predecessor as dictator . 
Mr. Krenz has followed much the same career path as Mr. Honecker : Both spent years overseeing the Freie Deutsche Jugend , the youth group that is the communist regime 's principal tool for stamping young Germans into socialist citizens . 
More recently , Mr. Krenz has been in charge of East German security , and is the youngest member of the ruling Politburo . 
Faced with another Mr. Honecker , so many despairing East Germans are likely to flee that the two German peoples will get their reunification , de facto , on West German ground . 
But if East Germany 's arthritic Politburo does loosen up enough to permit Mr. Krenz to make serious efforts at reform , he will face a challenge just as fundamental . 
Abandoning socialism means abandoning the East German state 's reason for existence , and with it the justification for its watchdogs and its Wall . 
In this scenario it 's hard to imagine that a pale imitation of the Federal Republic could avoid being pulled into some kind of tie -- economic , federal or stronger -- with West Germany . 
Mr. Krenz may need a bit of time to consolidate his empire , which would do a lot to promote Reunification Scenario One . 
Cartoonists in West Germany have already mocked the exodus by imagining an advertisement placed by Mr. Honecker : `` Wanted : one people . '' 
The West German embassies in Prague , Budapest and Warsaw are continuing to find refugees at their gates . 
Of course East Germany , true to its tradition , could tighten its borders yet further . 
Two of the last gestures of the Honecker regime were to close the border to Czechoslovakia and install halogen lights in some spots along the frontier . 
But with world-wide opinion -- even , apparently in Moscow -- against East Germany , the country would have to turn itself into an Albania to clamp down further on refugees . 
There have been some reports that Mr. Krenz is moving to `` soften '' his reputation , notably rumors that it was he who kept East Germany 's state police off protesters ' backs at the country 's dismal 40th anniversary celebrations earlier this month . 
But even if he effects a Hyde-to-Jekyll transformation , he will face a serious ideological crisis and Reunification Scenario Two . 
The problem is one that East Germany shares with other half-states , such as North Korea , but one it must shoulder alone in the East Bloc . 
When Poland moves to reform , it can at least lean on its past : However flawed and short-lived Joseph Pilsudski 's interwar republic , it was a nonsocialist democracy . 
Czech reformers can recall the Wilsonian ideals of the same period in their country . 
Even the Soviet Union has Peter the Great to rediscover , should it choose to . 
But East Germany is merely `` the land of truly existing socialism . '' 
Beyond that , it has to compete with West Germany for a claim to the German identity . 
Up to now , the main weapon of the `` worker and peasant state '' has been the ideology of socialism . 
With talk today of a second economic miracle in West Germany , East Germany no longer can content itself with being the economic star in a loser league . 
Without Moscow 's military and party behind it , East Germany runs the risk of disintegrating . 
If it goes capitalist , and increases trade with West Germany , it will convert itself , willy-nilly , into an economic annex of the Federal Republic . 
There 's a certain cruel logic at work here : It 's particularly appropriate -- and tragic -- that the land that produced Karl Marx should prove socialism 's failure in an experiment that uses its own people as controls . 
There may be forces that would delay this scenario . 
Ideologues are the last to surrender , and Germans are an ideological people . 
The protesters who greeted Mikhail Gorbachev at East Berlin 's airport earlier this month were n't shouting `` Go U.S.A '' -- they were chanting `` Gorby , Help Us . '' 
Ideologues on the other side of the border can also slow the process . 
Helmut Kohl 's governing conservative coalition is proving admirably true to the West German constitution by making more than 500,000 people of German descent automatic citizens this year alone . 
But within the government and in the think tanks outside it , many West Germans maintain that they do n't want immediate reunification . 
Politically , this currently is wisdom -- particularly given a nervous neighboring France . 
But it would be ironic if Germany 's reunification , just like its division , eventually were the result of actions in centers of power other than Bonn and Berlin . 
In a statement that was as close as East Germany gets to practicing `` glasnost '' , Otto Reinhold , an East German party theorist , actually acknowledged the reunification dilemma . 
`` The main problem , '' Mr. Reinhold said in an East German radio interview monitored by Radio Free Europe in Munich , stems from the fact that `` the GDR is different '' from other East European states . 
`` What kind of right to exist , '' he asked , `` would a capitalist German Democratic Republic have alongside a capitalist Federal Republic ? '' 
That 's a question East Germany ca n't answer easily , no matter what its new leader does . 
Miss Shlaes is editorial features editor of The Wall Street Journal / Europe . 
INSURERS ARE FACING billions of dollars in damage claims from the California quake . 
But most businesses in the Bay area , including Silicon Valley , were n't greatly affected . 
Computer and software companies in the region are expecting virtually no long-term disruption in shipments . 
Also , investors quickly singled out stocks of companies expected to profit or suffer from the disaster . 
Leveraged buy-outs may be curbed by two rules in pending congressional legislation . 
The provisions , in deficit-reduction bills recently passed by the House and Senate , could raise the price tags of such deals by up to 10 % and cool the takeover boom . 
A bill giving the Transportation Department the power to block airline leveraged buy-outs cleared a House panel . 
But Secretary Skinner said he would urge Bush to veto the bill . 
Housing starts sank 5.2 % in September to a seven-year low . 
The drop , following a 6.2 % decline in August , indicates the industry is still being hurt by the Fed 's anti-inflation battle . 
IBM plans to buy back $ 1 billion of its common shares , a move likely to help the computer giant 's battered stock . 
The buy-back , which was n't a complete surprise , was announced after the stock market had closed . 
A capital-gains tax cut plan has been worked out by Senate Republicans . 
A similar proposal may be introduced soon by Senate Democrats . 
British Airways said it is seeking improved terms and a sharply lower price in any revised bid for United Air 's parent . 
The British carrier also confirmed it is n't committed to going forward with any new bid . 
UAL 's stock fell $ 6.25 , to $ 191.75 . 
Stock prices rose slightly as trading slowed , while bonds ended little changed despite a slumping dollar . 
The Dow Jones industrials gained 4.92 , to 2643.65 . 
But investors remain wary about stocks , partly because of turmoil in the junk-bond market . 
B.A.T Industries may delay part of its defensive restructuring plan , including the sale of its Saks Fifth Avenue and Marshall Field units . 
The British conglomerate cited the recent turmoil in financial markets . 
WCRS Group announced a major restructuring that largely removes it from the advertising business . 
The London-based concern will sell most of its ad unit to France 's Eurocom . 
Commodore International expects to post its second consecutive quarterly loss because of weak personal computer sales in some markets . 
Jaguar hopes to reach a friendly accord with General Motors within a month that may involve producing a cheaper executive model . 
Sears is negotiating to refinance its Sears Tower for close to $ 850 million , sources said . 
The retailer was unable to find a buyer for the building . 
Whitbread of Britain put its spirits division up for sale , setting off a scramble among distillers . 
The business includes Beefeater gin . 
Markets -- 
Stocks : Volume 166,900,000 shares . 
Dow Jones industrials 2643.65 , up 4.92 ; transportation 1247.87 , off 6.40 ; utilities 213.97 , off 0.57 . 
Bonds : Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 3371.36 , off 
Commodities : Dow Jones futures index 129.90 , up 0.18 ; spot index 130.36 , up 0.39 . 
Dollar : 141.45 yen , off 1.30 ; 1.8485 marks , off 0.0182 . 
The dollar finished softer yesterday , tilted lower by continued concern about the stock market . 
`` We 're trading with a very wary eye on Wall Street , '' said Trevor Woodland , chief corporate trader at Harris Trust & Savings Bank in New York . 
`` No one is willing to place a firm bet that the stock market wo n't take another tumultuous ride . '' 
News of the major earthquake in California Tuesday triggered a round of dollar sales in early Asian trade , but most foreign-exchange dealers said they expect the impact of the quake on financial markets to be short-lived . 
Despite the dollar 's lackluster performance , some foreign-exchange traders maintain that the U.S. unit remains relatively well bid . 
Harris Trust 's Mr. Woodland noted that the unit continues to show resilience in the face of a barrage of `` headline negatives '' in recent weeks , including rate increases in Europe and Japan , aggressive central bank intervention , a 190-point plunge in New York stock prices , an unexpectedly poor U.S. trade report and action by the Federal Reserve to nudge U.S. rates lower . 
While Mr. Woodland does n't predict a significant climb for the U.S. unit in light of recent moves in interest rates around the world , he noted that `` its downside potential is surprisingly and -- for dollar bulls -- `` impressively '' limited . 
In late New York trading yesterday , the dollar was quoted at 1.8485 marks , down from 1.8667 marks late Tuesday , and at 141.45 yen , down from 142.75 yen late Tuesday . 
Sterling was quoted at $ 1.5920 , up from $ 1.5753 late Tuesday . 
In Tokyo Thursday , the U.S. currency opened for trading at 140.97 yen , down from Wednesday 's Tokyo close of 142.10 yen . 
Since Friday 's dive in stock market prices , the Fed has injected reserves into the banking system in an effort to calm the markets and avert a repeat of 1987 's stock market debacle . 
Some analysts note that after last week 's stock market tailspin and Tuesday 's California earthquake , it 's hard to gauge where the central bank wants the key federal funds rate . 
They say that the earthquake , by preventing many banks from operating at full capacity , has given the Fed an additional reason to keep liquidity at a high level . 
The Fed did , in fact , execute $ 1.5 billion of liquidity-enhancing customer repurchase agreements , the third set of repurchase orders in three days . 
Analysts said the additional liquidity should tend to reduce the federal funds rate . 
For now , traders say the foreign exchange market is scrutinizing both federal funds and events on Wall Street . 
They note that the dollar remains extremely vulnerable to the slightest bad news from the stock exchange . 
Indeed , the U.S. unit edged lower as the Dow Jones Industrial Average dropped about 13 points in early trading . 
A slight recovery in the stock market gave currency traders confidence to push the dollar higher before the unit dropped back by day 's end . 
Some dealers noted that nervousness over the recent sharp dive in stock prices could intensify following suggestions by Bank of Japan Governor Satoshi Sumita that appeared to advise Japanese investors to be very careful in investing in U.S. leveraged buy-outs . 
Dealers suggest that the only positive news on the horizon that could detract attention from equities transactions is September 's U.S. consumer price data . 
The figures , due for release Friday , are expected to show an uptick in inflation to 4.8 % from 4.7 % in August . 
If the figures show a hefty rise in inflation , they could militate against easing by the Fed . 
On the Commodity Exchange in New York , gold for current delivery rose $ 1.30 to $ 368.70 an ounce in moderate trading . 
Estimated volume was three million ounces . 
In early trading in Hong Kong Thursday , gold was at $ 368.15 an ounce . 
Crude prices spurted upward in brisk trading on the assumption that heavy earthquake damage occurred to San Francisco area refinery complexes , but the rise quickly fizzled when it became apparent that oil operations were n't severely curtailed . 
Trading on little specific information , market players overnight in Tokyo began bidding up oil prices . 
The rally spread into European markets , where traders were still betting that the earthquake disrupted the San Francisco area 's large oil refining plants . 
By yesterday morning , much of the world was still unable to reach San Francisco by telephone . 
West Texas Intermediate was bid up more than 20 cents a barrel in many overseas markets . 
At the opening of the New York Mercantile Exchange , West Texas Intermediate for November delivery shot up 10 cents a barrel , to $ 20.85 , still on the belief that the refineries were damaged . 
In the San Francisco area , roughly 800,000 barrels a day of crude , about a third of all the refining capacity in California , is processed daily , according to industry data . 
For more than the past year , even the rumor of a major West Coast refinery shutdown has been enough to spark a futures rally because the gasoline market is so tight . 
But yesterday , as the morning wore on , some major West Coast refinery operators -- including Chevron Corp. , Exxon Corp. and the Shell Oil Co. unit of Royal Dutch / Shell Group -- said their refineries were n't damaged and were continuing to operate normally . 
Most said they shut down their petroleum pipeline operations as a precaution but did n't see any immediate damage . 
Gasoline terminals were also largely unhurt , they said . 
`` It 's hard to imagine how the markets were speculating , given that nobody could get through to San Francisco , '' said one amazed oil company executive . 
As the news spread that the refineries were intact , crude prices plunged , ending the day at $ 20.56 a barrel , down 19 cents . 
Gasoline for November delivery was off 1.26 cents a gallon to 54.58 cents . 
Heating oil finished at 60.6 cents , down 0.45 cent . 
`` The market was basically acting on two contradictory forces , '' said Nauman Barakat of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc . 
`` One is the panic , the earthquake in San Francisco , which is positive . '' 
But once that factor was eliminated , traders took profits and focused on crude oil inventories , Mr. Barakat said . 
After the market closed Tuesday , the American Petroleum Institute had reported that crude stocks increased by 5.7 million barrels in the week ended Friday , which traders viewed as bearish . 
But some market players still think earthquake speculation could have more impact on the oil markets . 
`` The problem is that while on the surface everything is all right , the question is , '' said Mr. Barakat , `` was there any structural damage to the pipelines or anything else . '' 
In other commodity markets yesterday : 
COPPER : 
Futures prices eased on indications of improvement in the industry 's labor situation . 
The December contract declined 1.85 cents a pound to $ 1.2645 . 
According to one analyst , workers at the Cananea copper mine in Mexico , which has n't been operating since it was declared bankrupt by the Mexican government in late August , are set to return to work . 
The analyst said it will take about two to three months before the mine begins to produce copper in significant quantities . 
He added that , while there has n't been any official announcement as yet , the Highland Valley mine strike in British Columbia , which has lasted more than three months , is regarded as settled . 
Another analyst said the Cananea return to operation may not be as near as some expect . 
`` There are still negotiations taking place on whether there will be a loss of jobs , which has been a critical issue all along , '' he said . 
Nevertheless , the increasing likelihood that these two major supply disruptions will be resolved weighed on the market , the analysts agreed . 
Both of these mines are normally major suppliers of copper to Japan , which has been buying copper on the world market . 
The first analyst said that the Japanese , as well as the Chinese , bought copper earlier in the week in London , but that this purchasing has since slackened as the supply situation , at least over the long term , appears to have improved . 
`` The focus for some time has been on the copper supply , and good demand has been taken for granted , '' he said . 
`` Now that the supply situation seems to be improving , it would be best for traders to switch their concentration to the demand side . '' 
He noted the Commerce Department report yesterday that housing starts in September dropped 5.2 % from August to 1.26 million units on an annualized basis , the lowest level in seven years . 
`` Along with these factors , other economic reports suggest a slowing of the economy , which could mean reduced copper usage , '' he said . 
SUGAR : 
Futures prices extended Tuesday 's gains . 
The March delivery ended with an advance of 0.16 cent a pound to 14.27 cents , for a two-day gain of 0.3 cent . 
According to one dealer , Japan said it has only 40,000 tons of sugar remaining to be shipped to it this year by Cuba under current commitments . 
The announcement was made because of reports Tuesday that Cuba would delay shipments to Japan scheduled for later this year , into early next year . 
The dealer said the quantity mentioned in the Japanese announcement is so small that it 's meaningless . 
One analyst said he thought the market continued to be supported to some degree by a delay in the Cuban sugar harvest caused by adverse weather . 
The dealer said India might be the real factor that is keeping futures prices firm . 
That country recently bought 200,000 tons of sugar and had been expected to seek a like quantity last week but did n't . 
`` It 's known they need the sugar , and the expectation that they will come in is apparently giving the market its principal support , '' the dealer said . 
LIVESTOCK AND MEATS : 
The Agriculture Department is expected to announce tomorrow that the number of cattle in the 13 major ranch states slipped 4 % to 8.21 million on Oct. 1 compared with the level a year earlier , said Tom Morgan , president of Sterling Research Corp. , Arlington Heights , Ill . 
Cattle prices have risen in recent weeks on speculation that the government 's quarterly report will signal tighter supplies of beef . 
Among other things , the government is expected to report that the number of young cattle placed on feedlots during the quarter slipped 3 % . 
Feedlots fatten cattle for slaughter , so a drop indicates that the production of beef will dip this winter . 
Indeed , some analysts expect the government to report that the movement of young cattle onto feedlots in the month of September in seven big ranch states dropped 8 % compared with the level for September 1988 . 
The following issues were recently filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission : 
Health Care Property Investors Inc. , offering of 2,250,000 shares of common stock , via Merrill Lynch Capital Markets , Alex . Brown & Sons Inc. and Dean Witter Reynolds Inc . 
Union Pacific Corp. , shelf offering of up to $ 500 million debt securities and warrants . 
United Technologies Corp. , shelf offering of up to $ 500 million unsubordinated non-convertible unsecured debt securities . 
A new drug to prevent the rejection of transplanted organs has been successfully used on more than 100 patients at the University of Pittsburgh , according to researchers . 
The drug , which is still in the experimental phase , has n't been approved yet by the Food and Drug Admistration , and its long-term effects are unknown . 
But researchers say the drug , called FK-506 , could revolutionize the transplantation field by reducing harmful side effects and by lowering rejection rates . 
Rejection has been the major obstacle in the approximately 30,000 organ transplants performed world-wide each year . 
Researchers began using the drug in February on patients who had received kidney , liver , heart and pancreas transplants . 
Only two of 111 transplants have been rejected . 
The drug , discovered in 1984 , is metabolized from soil fungus found in Japan . 
The Pittsburgh patients are the first humans to be given the drug , which is made by Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co . 
`` We 're shocked by it , because it 's worked so fast , '' said Dr. Thomas E. Starzl , director of the University of Pittsburgh Transplantation Program , at a news conference here yesterday . 
`` We consider it a life-saving drug , like one for AIDS , '' said Dr. John Fung , an immunologist at the University of Pittsburgh . 
Researchers say they believe FK-506 is 100 times more effective than the traditional anti-rejection drug , cyclosporine , made by Swiss pharmaceutical giant Sandoz Ltd . 
They are also encouraged by the relatively mild side effects of FK-506 , compared with cyclosporine , which can cause renal failure , morbidity , nausea and other problems . 
`` The side effects { of cyclosporine } have made the penalty for its success rather high , '' Dr. Starzl said . 
Dr. Fung said that FK-506 would not be available in the market for at least a year , and that the FDA approval process usually takes three years to five years . 
There are no firm plans to expand the experimental program beyond the University of Pittsburgh , whose hospital performs the most transplants in the world . 
Researchers could n't estimate the cost of the drug when it reaches the market , but they said FK-506 will enable patients to cut hospital stays by 50 % and reduce the number of blood tests used to monitor the dosage of cyclosporine and other drugs among transplant recipients . 
Dr. Starzl said the research has been largely financed by the National Institute of Health and by university funds , and that Fujisawa did n't give the hospital any grants . 
He said that the research team had no financial stake in the drug . 
`` We 've known for six months the effect of this drug , and our advice to our people has been not to buy the company 's stock , '' Dr. Starzl said , adding that profiting from FK-506 would n't be ethical . 
Economist David N. Laband 's Sept. 27 editorial-page article , `` In Hugo 's Path , a Man-Made Disaster , '' decries the control of price gouging , swiftly ordered by South Carolina 's governor after Hurricane Hugo . 
According to Mr. Laband , `` screaming '' for price controls occurs when income redistribution `` threatens to hit home . '' 
To be sure , the threat has hit home down here . 
Yet in Mr. Laband 's rehash of free-market logic , human greed and self-interest are the only permissible psychological reactions . 
Allowing uncontrolled prices for necessities would indeed shorten the lines at stores , as he contends . 
But not because resources are going to their most efficient use , leaving scarce goods `` allocated to those buyers who place the highest value on them . '' 
Rather , lines would diminish because at higher prices many victims could not afford necessities such as food and medical supplies . 
It is inhumane to imply that a poor , unemployed woman can not receive immediate relief for her family at fair prices because she does not have as much to protect as a rich family . 
Moreover , essential relief supplies such as ice must be distributed throughout the population because of potential health problems from spoiled food and possible outbreak of disease . 
Such spillover effects give the state a right to intervene in the marketplace and temporarily coordinate allocation of resources . 
Fortunately , volunteers and charities are not motivated by self-interest , but by altruism . 
Why should they have to co-exist with opportunists rushing in to turn a quick profit ? 
These latter-day scalawags would be ill-advised to take advantage of the situation , if they ever expect to face the people of South Carolina again . 
The government is actually protecting avaricious ice-baggers and other profiteers who can not see beyond their own short-term gain . 
South Carolina deserves an A for its quick and timely relief efforts . 
Mr. Laband , meanwhile , gets an A for his rote recital of economic-efficiency arguments . 
Give him an F for his failure to understand the ethics of economic equity . 
Signed by 25 students 
Of Douglas Woodward 's Honors Economics Class , 
University of South Carolina 
Columbia , S.C . 
Mr. Laband gives us an idea why economists ' predictions are usually wrong . 
They set up absurd situations , detached from reality , and then try to reason from them . 
I 'm surprised he did n't advocate letting people loot , since that behavior can also be foreseen in a disaster and `` every individual has an incentive to alter the distribution of income in his favor . '' 
Price controls were `` so fervently embraced by Charleston '' because price gouging in this situation is equivalent to looting . 
Suzanne Foster 
Galax , Va . 
Mr. Laband described one of the more insidious threats we face when dealing with disasters such as Hugo -- anti-profiteering ordinances such as that by the Charleston City Council as it thrashed about trying to Do Something . 
Since he concentrated on the economic folly of such ordinances , he did n't mention certain other of their effects . 
They divert law-enforcement resources at a time they are most needed for protecting lives and property . 
Also , rather than increase supplies , they reduce them and encourage hoarding . 
And they , or even the prospect of them , discourage disaster preparedness in the form of speculative advance stocking of supplies by merchants . 
N. Joseph Potts 
Miami Lakes , Fla . 
Would Mr. Laband also suggest that the Red Cross , Salvation Army , military units , police , fire departments , rescue units and individual citizens cease their efforts to assist Hugo 's victims because they interfere with his concept of the `` free market '' ? 
What about those caring people all over the country who are donating food , water and other necessities of life to these people who could be any of us ? 
Should they , too , stop `` messing with '' his free market ? 
Maybe he thinks they should also sell to the highest bidder . 
And what about insurance firms ? 
Should they be required to pay claims based on exorbitant costs for labor and materials ? 
Mr. Laband should beware , since he lives in South Carolina . 
In a free market , his insurance rates can be raised to recover insurance-company losses . 
John W. Rush 
Marietta , Ga . 
Having been through several tornadoes and hurricanes , I have a different perspective . 
Mine comes from seeing thriving communities devastated -- but only temporarily . 
Their recovery came surprisingly fast , and always with the help of neighbors . 
The shock of seeing homes destroyed and city services disrupted may cause some to confuse priorities such as the true economic value of a freezer full of meat . 
In Texas after Hurricane Alicia , major grocery chains used their truck fleets to ship essential goods to Houston , no gouging , just good will . 
Tom Mongan 
Victoria , Texas 
We here in the affected areas were dazzled by Mr. Laband 's analysis of time values and his comparisons of effectiveness concerning research and development . 
His theoretical approach and its publication in this venerable paper are no doubt a noteworthy accomplishment for him . 
Too bad theory fails in practice . 
We consumers tend to have long memories . 
The businesses subscribing to Mr. Laband 's effective price system will be remembered when normalcy returns . 
Perhaps , considering the value of our time , we will be unable to patronize their establishments in the post-Hugo era . 
I have a question for Mr. Laband : How do I explain to the single mother of three standing in line next to me for the past three hours that the two bags of ice she needs to keep her children 's food edible will take her last $ 20 ? 
I 'm sure she 'll appreciate what an efficient reaction to her problems the price system has created . 
Chris Edgar 
Myrtle Beach , S.C . 
This seems to be the season for revivals in Chicago . 
Though the Cubs ' championship season ended with the National League playoffs , a revival of the Organic Theater 's production of `` Bleacher Bums , '' a play in nine innings set in the Wrigley Field bleachers , continues within spitting distance of the ballpark . 
Revivals of a different sort also are being offered by our two major theater troupes , the Goodman and Steppenwolf . 
Each is more problematic than an unexpected divisional baseball championship , but both help explain why Chicago remains a vital center of this country 's regional theater movement . 
The Goodman is offering a modernized version of Moliere 's `` The Misanthrope '' through Nov. 4 . 
The original is a comedy about Alceste , a man who sees falseness and vanity in everyone except himself . 
He is the jealous friend of Philinte , and the jealous lover of Celimene . 
The play is filled with intrigue , dishonesty and injustice . 
Twenty-five years ago the poet Richard Wilbur modernized this 17th-century comedy merely by avoiding `` the zounds sort of thing , '' as he wrote in his introduction . 
Otherwise , the scene remained Celimene 's house in 1666 . 
Assuming modern audiences readily understand that Moliere 's social indictment covers their world as well as 17th-century Paris , Mr. Wilbur concentrated his formidable artistry on rendering the Alexandrine French verse into sprightly and theatrical English iambic pentameter . 
The Wilbur translation is remarkable -- well worth a read and even better seen in the theater if you ever have the opportunity . 
But if you happen to be coming to Chicago in the next few weeks , do n't fail to have a look at Robert Falls 's `` The Misanthrope '' at the Goodman . 
If Mr. Wilbur 's translation is a finely ground lens through which we see the pettiness and corruption of 17th-century Paris , Mr. Falls 's production is a mirror in which we see ourselves . 
Mr. Falls , the Goodman 's artistic director , took a recent adaptation by Neil Bartlett and significantly adapted it . 
Mr. Bartlett had slimmed Moliere 's cast of characters to six and set them in the London media world of Thatcherite Britain . 
Mr. Falls transfers the setting to Hollywood , and transforms the characters into what passes for aristocracy there -- agents , producers , actors , writers and sycophants . 
It works . 
Mr. Bartlett managed to more or less maintain Moliere 's Alexandrine verse form , 12 syllable lines in rhyming couplets . 
Mr. Falls kept the form , but Americanized it with Mr. Bartlett 's further help . 
With a splendid cast led by David Darlow as Alceste , Christina Haag as Celimene and , especially , William Brown as a Philinte who plays the Hollywood game but harbors authentic values and feelings , the Goodman production barrels through an all-night Hollywood party with exuberance and wit . 
If this version , with its references to Steven Spielberg , Spago and `` thirtysomething '' attracts younger audiences who might stay away from the classical version , then Messrs. Bartlett and Falls are justified in abandoning Mr. Wilbur . 
A 300-year-old play may be easier to revive than one merely 25 . 
The Steppenwolf Theatre Company , back from a critical and box office success in London with its adaptation of Steinbeck 's `` The Grapes of Wrath , '' opened the new season with Harold Pinter 's `` The Homecoming , '' first produced by the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1965 . 
Back then , Mr. Pinter was not only the angry young British playwright , but also the first to use silences and sentence fragments and menacing stares , almost to the exclusion of what we previously understood to be theatrical dialogue . 
When `` The Homecoming '' was first produced on this side of the Atlantic , actors and directors were reverential . 
Silences were lengthy -- nobody moved or gestured . 
Nobody smiled onstage , and nobody in the audience was encouraged to laugh . 
This kind of theater was new to us . 
Also , it was not a funny time over here , what with the Vietnam War , the '68 Democratic convention , assassinations and riots . 
But under Jerry Perry 's direction the current Steppenwolf production , scheduled to play through Nov. 19 , breaks through the flat and boring ritual that `` The Homecoming '' had become . 
Led by a near-perfect performance by Alan Wilder as Max , the father , the play is at once an appalling and hilarious dissection of a family 's rage , bitterness , fear and isolation . 
Encouraged by Mr. Wilder 's sly grins , embarrassed grimaces and sputtering rages , the audience gets the joke and begins to laugh before the end of the first act . 
Three of the family members , Max and his two sons , Lenny and Joey , live off the flesh : Max is a retired butcher , Lenny a pimp and Joey an aspiring boxer . 
Sam , Max 's brother , has escaped the flesh by working as a liveried chauffeur and never seeking a wife . 
Teddy , the eldest of Max 's sons , has made the most dramatic escape by becoming a professor of philosophy at an American university . 
Though it 's clearly Max 's wife who held sway here until her death , now none of the other male residents of this misbegotten household can challenge Max . 
The play concerns Teddy 's homecoming with his wife of six years , Ruth . 
Curiously , Randall Arney as Teddy seems the only cast member unable to get beyond the zombie approach to a Pinter character . 
As Ruth , Moira Harris , a large and beautiful woman who may be our next Colleen Dewhurst , begins almost immediately to overpower each of the men . 
In the end , Teddy returns alone to America , leaving Ruth in Max 's chair . 
We have seen her develop within a few hours from a shy and unknown in-law to a goddess of the flesh who will replace the dead mother , and then some . 
While Steppenwolf was in London with `` The Grapes of Wrath , '' Bruce Sagan , the president of its board of directors , quietly returned to Chicago to buy a piece of real estate in the city 's rapidly reviving North Halsted Street restaurant and theater district . 
Within a year he hopes Steppenwolf will move into a new 500-seat theater on that site . 
The troupe currently performs in a converted dairy that seats 211 and provides little capacity for staging anything beyond a simple one-set production . 
`` If we wanted to stage ` Death of a Salesman , ' `` Mr. Sagan says , `` Willie Loman would have to live in a ranch house because of the low ceiling . '' 
Steppenwolf needs the extra seats even more than the fly space . 
It 's currently forced to turn away many potential subscribers beyond the 13,000 who can be accommodated in its present digs . 
For all the attention that Chicago theater has received during the past decade , not one new building has been devoted to it . 
Mr. Sagan , a former publisher and real estate developer , has put together an $ 8 million financial package that includes approximately $ 4 million of tax exempt bonds issued by the State of Illinois ( the first time that a state has used its educational facilities authority to support construction of a theater ) , and approximately $ 1 million in grants from the National Endowment for the Arts , the MacArthur Foundation , and a few other deep pockets . 
The rest , he is confident , can be raised . 
His board members alone have pledged $ 800,000 and he is just beginning to massage local foundations and corporations . 
Mr. Sagan compares the importance of Steppenwolf with Orson Welles 's Mercury Theater in the '30s . 
But Welles 's theater company turned out to have a brief -- one might say a mercurial -- existence . 
What will Mr. Sagan do with his new theater building if the allure of Hollywood and Broadway proves too much for such Steppenwolf stalwarts as John Malkovich ( `` Dangerous Liaisons '' ) , Joan Allen ( `` The Heidi Chronicles '' ) , and Glenne Headly ( `` Lonesome Dove '' ) , and the company crumbles ? 
`` That 's OK , '' Mr. Sagan replies . 
`` Let this building be Steppenwolf 's legacy to Chicago theater . '' 
Mr. Henning is a Chicago-based law firm management consultant and a writer . 
After enduring three days of heavy selling , the beleaguered Nasdaq over-the-counter market finally rebounded , rising sharply in hearty trading . 
The Nasdaq Composite Index jumped 0.7 % , or 3.35 , to 463.28 . 
It rose more than the New York Stock Exchange Composite , which improved 0.2 % . 
Among bigger stocks , the Nasdaq 100 Index rose 1 % , or 4.56 , to 453.05 , while the Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 0.2 % . 
Richard Bruno , head of OTC trading at PaineWebber , said the OTC market has a habit of lagging big moves on the New York Stock Exchange . 
While the industrial average rallied on Monday following last Friday 's collapse , the OTC market , which did n't suffer too badly during the correction , tumbled . 
`` Our market got hit a lot harder on Monday than the listed market , '' Mr. Bruno said . 
`` We 're just recovering and getting back to business as usual . 
I 'm encouraged by the action . '' 
The trading pace was busy , with 4,343 issues and 147.6 million shares changing hands . 
Advancing issues beat declining ones , 1,271 to 811 . 
Much of the jockeying by OTC traders and investors centered on shares of companies that might be financially affected by damage from the devastating earthquake in northern California . 
As investors speculated about the long - and short-term implications , shares of a number of companies that might either profit or face problems because of the disaster were actively traded . 
Heading the list : insurance , construction and technology companies located in the San Francisco Bay Area . 
Insurance-related stocks were mixed as investors tried to figure out how to assess the impact of the property damage and deaths on those concerns . 
Traders said property-casualty companies with the heaviest exposure in the San Francisco area include the OTC 's Safeco and Ohio Casualty . 
Frank Gilmartin , a trader who follows insurance stocks for Fox-Pitt Kelton , said his strategy was to sell early . 
Then , if the stocks fell sharply , he planned to begin buying them aggressively , on the theory that the companies that insure against property damage and accidents will have to raise rates eventually to compensate for the claims they will pay to earthquake victims and victims of last month 's Hurricane Hugo . 
As well , reinsurers and insurance brokerage companies will have improved profits . 
Many investors expected damage from the hurricane to be the catalyst for higher rates in the industry , which has been depressed because of low rates arising from intense competition . 
But Mr. Gilmartin said the hurricane damage was n't extensive enough to prompt premium boosts . 
`` The companies just gave back what they had reserved for , '' he said . 
`` Now , they 'll have to increase their coffers to protect for the future and that means rate increases . '' 
Overall OTC insurance issues were mixed . 
Safeco fell 1\/8 to 32 5\/8 on 462,900 shares . 
Ohio Casualty rose 1\/4 to 51 3\/4 on 137,200 shares . 
St. Paul Cos. jumped 2 to 59 3\/4 on 517,500 shares . 
Academy Insurance fell 1\/32 to 1 3\/16 ; but volume totaled 1.2 million shares . 
The Nasdaq Insurance Index jumped 4.15 to 529.32 on the day , while the barometer of big insurance and banking issues climbed 1.72 to 455.29 . 
Investors expect SunGard Data Systems , a company that provides disaster recovery services for computer-dependent businesses , to profit from the earthquake . 
SunGard 's stock rose 1 3\/4 to 21 1\/4 on 194,000 shares . 
Shares of Kasler , a California road and bridge builder , were heavily traded , jumping 2 1\/8 to 9 7\/8 on 1.3 million shares . 
Guy F. Atkinson added 7\/8 to 16 7\/8 , on 335,700 shares . 
The company , based in San Francisco , provides industrial infrastructure engineering and construction services . 
Traders were initially nervous about shares of companies , including many leading OTC computer companies , such as Apple Computer with offices in the vicinity of the area damaged by the quake . 
But most of those stocks fared well . 
Apple Computer gained 1 to 48 1\/4 ; Ashton-Tate rose 3\/8 to 10 3\/8 . 
Intel also added 3\/8 to 33 7\/8 . 
But Sun Microsystems slipped 1\/4 to 17 1\/4 . 
Shares of biotechnology companies in the area were also higher . 
Chiron was up 1\/2 to 27 and Cetus gained 1\/2 to 16 3\/8 . 
The stocks of computer-related companies located outside California improved , too . 
Microsoft advanced 1 7\/8 to 80 1\/2 and Lotus Development added 1 1\/4 to 32 1\/2 . 
In other earthquake-related news , Hambrecht & Quist 's OTC market makers were excused from trading yesterday and its positions were frozen for the day by the National Association of Securities Dealers . 
Power could n't be restored at the company 's San Francisco headquarters to allow trading yesterday morning . 
In New York , Roger Killion , a Hambrecht executive vice president , said he expects OTC trading at the company to resume this morning , either in New York or in San Francisco . 
In other trading , Medco Containment Services gained 7\/8 to 15 on 1.9 million shares after reporting a loss for the first quarter , which ended Sept. 30 . 
The company earned $ 6.6 million in the year-earlier quarter . 
Jaguar 's American depositary receipts added 3\/8 to 10 3\/4 on volume of 1.1 million . 
Analysts in London believe investors , despite their stampede to dump takeover stocks , should hold on tight to their Jaguar shares , this newspaper 's Heard on the Street column said yesterday . 
Amgen rose 1 1\/2 to 50 3\/4 in heavy trading . 
Analysts figure Amgen could benefit as a result of troubles facing its competitor , Genetics Institute , over the anti-anemia drug EPO . 
Genetics Institute disclosed recently that it is embroiled in a dispute with Boehringer Mannheim , which distributes the drug , regarding the usability of some batches . 
Ciba-Geigy Ltd. and Chiron Corp. said they extended their offer for Connaught BioSciences Inc. , valued at 866 million Canadian dollars ( US$ 736 million ) to Oct. 27 . 
The companies earlier said they did n't want to raise their offer to match a rival bid by Institut Merieux S.A. of C$ 37 a share , or C$ 942 million . 
But they said the C$ 30-a-share bid , which was due to expire Monday , may still be extended or varied . 
Merieux , a vaccine manufacturer based in Lyon , France , is 51%-held by French state-owned Rhone-Poulenc S.A . 
Ciba-Geigy is a major pharmaceutical concern based in Basel , Switzerland . 
Chiron , another pharmaceutical concern , is based in Emeryville , Calif . 
Connaught is a biotechnology research and vaccine manufacturing concern . 
Institut Merieux 's bid for Toronto-based Connaught has run into problems with the Canadian government , which told Merieux last week that it was n't convinced that the proposed acquisition would be of `` net benefit '' to Canada . 
Merieux officials are expected to meet with federal officials in Ottawa today to discuss the decision . 
Within minutes after the stock market closed Friday , I called Sen. Bill Bradley of New Jersey , advised him that the Dow Jones Industrial Average had declined by 190 points late that afternoon , and cheerfully informed him that he and his fellow Democrats were to blame . 
They had dealt a major setback that afternoon to President Bush 's capital-gains tax cut proposal , which had seemed in the bag after it passed the House overwhelmingly earlier in the month . 
Sen. Bradley has it in his mind that such a tax cut would unravel the tax reform he helped engineer in 1986 . 
But he knows that as many as 20 of his fellow Democrats are disposed to vote for the cut , popular among their constituents . 
As a result , he took the lead in arguing that the cut should be blocked on procedural grounds . 
He helped persuade 10 of these senators to support him and Majority Leader George Mitchell on these grounds . 
The budget reconciliation had to be dealt with by the Oct. 15 deadline , and these Senate Democrats refused to agree to allow a vote to append capital gains to the budget bill , knowing it would pass . 
Denied a vote on substance , the GOP leadership in the Senate on Friday morning was confronted with a hard choice . 
It could throw in the towel and hope to win on capital gains late this month , or it could follow the White House strategy , to veto reconciliation unless capital gains was appended . 
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce has been in the forefront in supporting the Bush proposal . 
It endorsed the White House strategy , believing it to be the surest way to victory . 
At noon Friday , a senior White House official advised Richard Rahn , the Chamber 's chief economist , that the White House would not agree to a budget reconciliation bill unless it had firm assurances that a vote on substance would be permitted in the Senate . 
Two hours later , the first word emerged on Capitol Hill that the administration had agreed to reconciliation with no such assurances from Senate Democrats . 
Mr. Rahn was shocked , telephoning the office of Richard Darman , director of the Office of Management and Budget , and the administration 's chief strategist on this issue . 
He left a message accusing Mr. Darman of selling out . 
It was the Senate Republicans , though , who had edged away from the veto strategy . 
The stock market reacted as Mr. Rahn did , crumbling as it absorbed the news that Mr. Darman 's strategy had been abandoned . 
The stock market , after all , represents the collective expectations about the value of the future income stream of the nation 's capital stock , discounted to present value . 
Why should it be so surprising that a 30 % cut in the capital-gains tax would have such an enormous impact on the value of the nation 's capital stock ? 
The total value of privately held assets is easily more than $ 15 trillion . 
The value traded on the exchanges is close to $ 3 trillion . 
If the tax on any gain to those assets was doubled , would n't the value fall to the owners of the assets ? 
Is n't it reasonable to assume that the asset you own would be worth more if the government suddenly announced that if you sold it , you would be able to keep 30 % more of its gain than you previously believed ? 
Indeed , the stock market 's steady advance this year tracked with President Bush 's success in advancing his capital-gains proposal . 
A 30 % cut in this year 's capital gains alone amounts to roughly $ 50 billion . 
We 're talking real money . 
When Richard Rahn advised the financial press that the market crash was caused by the setback to capital gains , he was generally ignored and mildly ridiculed . 
Instead , the press corps readily accepted the notion that a snag in the takeover financing of United Airlines instantly knocked 7 % off the value of the nation 's capital stock and caused convulsions around the world . 
Mr. Rahn was pointing out an elephant rumbling through Wall Street while conventional wisdom had fastened on the UAL flea . 
Why is this happening ? 
For one thing , quite a number of the leading spokesmen on Wall Street are not portfolio managers , who understand that the value of assets is greatly affected by how government taxes those assets . 
They are economists and financial reporters who sympathize with the view that a capital-gains tax cut benefits the rich . 
Yet they somehow think that Wall Street is indifferent to losing the tax cut that seemed so close Friday morning and is now problematic . 
The market rebound Monday followed weekend assurances from Mr. Darman that the administration has other plans to win the cut , which is alive and well . 
Sen. Bradley 's argument is that a capital-gains tax cut would be bad for the economy in the longer run . 
It would inevitably lead to an increase in marginal income-tax rates in 1990 , he thinks , when the White House is forced to ask for higher taxes to meet budget targets . 
That is , with capital gains cut , the glue of the 1986 accord will be gone , and political realities will push up income-tax rates . 
The counter-argument , which he has heard , is that if he and his fellow Democrats are successful in killing the president 's proposal , the revenue gap will open up tremendously in 1990 because of the weakened economy . 
In this atmosphere , there would be no serious consideration of tax increases . 
If Sen. Bradley would permit a vote on capital gains , though , it would pass , Christmas retail sales would be strong instead of burdened by a falling stock market , the 1990 economy would be robust , and the revenue gains at every level of government , including New Jersey 's , would be surprisingly high . 
No tax increases would be necessary . 
The struggle over capital gains is the most important game in town . 
In Washington and on Wall Street . 
Mr. Wanniski is president of Polyconomics Inc. , of Morristown , N.J . 
Federal prosecutors said they have obtained a guilty plea from another person in the government 's ongoing probe of illegal payments in the record industry . 
William Craig , an independent record promoter , pleaded guilty to payola and criminal tax charges , according to a statement issued by Gary Feess , the U.S. attorney here . 
Payola is the practice of making illegal , undisclosed payments to radio station personnel in return for getting the stations to play certain songs over the air . 
As part of his plea agreement with the government , the 44-year-old Mr. Craig faces a maximum of three years in prison . 
In return , Mr. Craig agreed to cooperate in the government 's continuing payola probe , says a spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney 's office . 
Mr. Craig and three others were indicted last year as part of that payola probe . 
Two other defendants previously pleaded guilty , and charges against the third were dropped . 
Companies listed below reported quarterly profit substantially different from the average of analysts ' estimates . 
The companies are followed by at least three analysts , and had a minimum five-cent change in actual earnings per share . 
Estimated and actual results involving losses are omitted . 
The percent difference compares actual profit with the 30-day estimate where at least three analysts have issues forecasts in the past 30 days . 
Otherwise , actual profit is compared with the 300-day estimate . 
Grumman Corp. was awarded a $ 53.1 million Navy contract for advanced acquisition of six E-2C tactical control aircraft . 
LTV Corp. won a $ 25 million Army contract for missile test equipment . 
Unisys Corp. received a $ 24.4 million Air Force contract for computer programming . 
Ford Aerospace & Communications Corp. , a unit of Ford Motor Co. , was awarded a $ 15.9 million Air Force contract for computer improvements . 
Rockwell International Corp. was issued a $ 12.5 million Air Force contract for changes in the National Aerospace Plane . 
The Tennessee Valley Authority issued $ 4 billion in bonds in the federal utility 's first public debt offering in 15 years . 
Proceeds from the bonds , with coupon rates in the 8 % range , will be used to replace bonds with an average interest rate of 13.1 % . 
The TVA said the refinancing should save $ 75 million a year in interest payments . 
The refinancing is part of the TVA 's strategy of dealing with what has been an intractable problem : its staggering $ 18.5 billion debt , most of which is owed to the Treasury Department 's Federal Financing Bank . 
The TVA currently plans to issue a total of $ 6.7 billion in bonds to refinance its high-interest debt . 
The $ 4 billion bond issue also will help the TVA meet its goal of not raising rates for another year , said William F. Malec , the agency 's chief financial officer . 
The bond issue is TVA 's first public offering since the Financing Bank was created in 1974 , primarily to finance the TVA . 
But the offering almost did n't happen . 
The TVA , in fact , decided to proceed with the bond offering following an agreement last week with the Financing Bank , which allows TVA to keep borrowing short term from the bank for two years after it goes to the public market . 
The Treasury contended that TVA could n't borrow from both it and the public debt market . 
The $ 4 billion in bonds break down as follows : $ 1 billion in five-year bonds with a coupon rate of 8.25 % and a yield to maturity of 8.33 % ; $ 1 billion in 10-year bonds with a coupon rate of 8.375 % and a yield to maturity of 8.42 % ; $ 2 billion in 30-year bonds with five-year call protection , a coupon rate of 8.75 % and a yield to maturity of 9.06 % . 
Managing the bond issue is a group of investment banks headed by First Boston Corp. and co-managed by Goldman , Sachs & Co. , Merrill Lynch Capital Markets , Morgan Stanley & Co. , and Salomon Brothers Inc . 
Mutual-fund czar John M. Templeton has put his money where his moniker is , pouring $ 1.4 million into one of his own funds , the Templeton Value Fund . 
Mr. Templeton owns shares in several of the 33 funds that his firm manages , but only in three of the 10 available to U.S. investors , according to filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission . 
Those are Templeton Global Income , Templeton Emerging Markets and now the Value Fund . 
Why did he add the Value Fund to the list ? 
Because he 's very bullish on the emerging growth stocks that make up the fund 's portfolio , Mr. Templeton said from his Bahamas hideaway . 
`` Emerging growth stocks have n't been popular in America for years , they 've been neglected , '' he said , and their prices often trail the market as a whole . 
Mr. Templeton 's 147,300-share purchase in the closed-end fund came before the U.S. stock market 's plunge last Friday , but still proved slightly profitable . 
Mr. Templeton bought his shares in several separate purchases between Aug. 30 and Sept. 28 , according to reports with the SEC . 
He bought at share prices ranging from $ 9.375 to $ 9.625 . 
The fund closed yesterday in New York Stock Exchange composite trading at $ 9.625 , up 12.5 cents . 
In addition , Mr. Templeton received a dividend of 22 cents a share Oct. 5 . 
RIVER RUN : 
A senior vice president and a vice president at James River Corp. sold the majority of their shares in the Richmond , Va. , paper-products concern in late August and early September , reports filed with the SEC show . 
The executives , who got $ 30.88 a share for the stock , showed good timing . 
In Big Board trading yesterday , James River shares closed at $ 28.375 , down 12.5 cents . 
On Sept. 6 , Robert Joseph Sherry , the firm 's senior vice president of employee and public relations , sold 4,000 shares , leaving himself with 1,062 shares of James River . 
Including a sale of stock last February , Mr. Sherry has sold 88 % of his stake in the company this year , according to SEC filings . 
Mr. Sherry declined to comment when asked about the sales . 
James A. Toney , a vice president , sold 1,500 shares Aug. 28 . 
He still has 1,143 shares , according to SEC files . 
Mr. Toney also declined to comment . 
INTEREST-RATE PLAYER : 
Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co. tops the companies portion of the accompanying Insider Trading table this week . 
Three of the utility 's directors have at least doubled their holdings in the company since July . 
The largest purchase was by Dudley Taft , who bought 4,400 shares for $ 125,075 . 
Mr. Taft , who is also president of Taft Broadcasting Co. , said he bought the shares because he keeps a utility account at the brokerage firm of Salomon Brothers Inc. , which had recommended the stock as a good buy . 
Salomon Brothers confirmed that it has had a buy recommendation on the stock for about two years . 
`` Cincinnati Gas & Electric is in good shape , '' Mr. Taft said , and utilities are `` a good investment because interest rates are going down . '' 
Mr. Taft paid an average of $ 28.43 for each share . 
The stock closed yesterday on the Big Board at $ 28.75 , down 12.5 cents . 
The two other directors bought 1,000 and 1,900 shares , respectively , at prices between $ 28.15 a share and $ 28.75 a share , filings with the SEC show . 
The two could n't be reached for comment . 
A company spokesman said he could n't explain their sudden bullishness . 
`` I do n't know of any news or anything unusual happening here , '' said Bruce Stoecklin , director of media services . 
Peter Pae in Pittsburgh contributed to this article . 
T. Rowe Price Associates Inc. said directors recommended stockholders approve a 2-for-1 stock split and an increase in authorized shares to 25 million from 10 million . 
Stockholders will vote on the proposal at a meeting Dec. 13 . 
T. Rowe Price is an investment adviser to mutual funds , institutions and individuals . 
In one of the first indoor air-pollution cases to go to trial , a state-court jury decided in favor of the defendant , Burlington Industries Inc . 
The verdict , reached late last week in Cincinnati , may end an eight-year legal battle for the Greensboro , N.C. , carpet maker . 
Glenn and Sharon Beebe of Cincinnati had sued the com - pany in 1981 after installing Burlington carpets in their office . 
The Beebes alleged that toxic fumes from the carpets made them sick . 
As a result of their illness , the Beebes said , they lost $ 1.8 million in wages and earnings . 
In addition , they said that months of exposure to the chemicals has left them sensitive to a wide range of commonly used substances . 
The case had been closely watched because attorneys anticipate increasing litigation nationally over the so-called sick-building syndrome . 
Plaintiffs ' lawyers say that buildings become `` sick '' when inadequate fresh air and poor ventilation systems lead pollutants to build up inside . 
Anthony J. Iaciofano , a lawyer for Burlington , said the company believes the Beebes ' symptoms were not related to the carpeting . 
He said that ill effects from new carpets manifest themselves immediately but that the Beebes ' symptoms appeared months later . 
Catherine Adams , the Beebes ' lawyer , said the verdict would not discourage other plaintiffs from filing such suits . 
Scientists are only beginning to understand what causes sick-building syndrome and much of that research was unavailable when the Beebes filed the case , she said . 
The Beebes now believe that a prime culprit for their injuries was fumes from an adhesive used in the carpeting . 
But the Beebes did n't come to that conclusion until time limits had elapsed for adding the adhesives maker as a defendant in the case , Ms. Adams said . 
The Beebes have not yet decided whether to appeal . 
TIMES SQUARE development opponents are dealt setback . 
The Appellate Division of New York State Supreme Court dismissed six lawsuits attempting to block a $ 2.5 billion project planned for 42nd Street in Manhattan . 
Opponents of the project had claimed that the city and the state of New York , which are co-sponsoring the project , had failed to adhere to environmental guidelines . 
All but two of the 40 or so lawsuits that have been filed since the project 's 1984 approval have been dismissed before the trial stage . 
The two that remain have n't yet reached the pre-trial fact-finding stage . 
State officials said the court 's ruling clears the way for proceedings to condemn buildings in the area . 
`` This project is ready to move , '' said State Urban Development Corp. Chairman Vincent Tese . 
But developers of four planned office towers cautioned that obstacles still remain . 
As part of the agreement with the state , the developers -- a partnership of Park Tower Realty and Prudential Insurance Co. of America -- said they would not proceed with condemnation proceedings while there was `` significant litigation '' pending . 
Park Tower General Counsel Matthew Mayer said the development team will have to review two additional lawsuits before putting up a $ 155 million letter of credit to cover condemnation costs . 
Also , he said , the partnership is waiting to see whether the appellate division 's ruling will be appealed . 
The plan , which has been plagued with delays and business-related setbacks , seeks to transform the area from a seedy thoroughfare to a more wholesome office and theater district . 
State and city officials are still negotiating with developers to renovate historic theaters and build and operate a merchandise mart and hotel . 
FEDERAL JUDGE EXPANDS role of U.S. courts in extradition decisions . 
U.S. District Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Brooklyn , N.Y. , ruled that a man implicated in an attack on an Israeli passenger bus in 1986 can be extradited to Israel for trial . 
A magistrate had initially refused the request , ruling that the attack had been a political act for which the man , Mahmoud El-Abed Ahmad , would be exempt from extradition . 
However , Judge Weinstein wrote in his opinion late last month that terrorism and acts of war against civilians can not be defined as political acts . 
Judge Weinstein also ruled that judges must consider prior to extradition whether the defendant will be treated fairly in a foreign court . 
To do so , the judge said , the U.S. courts must review the judicial process in the foreign country independently of the State Department 's assessment . 
He said that in this case he concurred with the State Department 's decision that Mr. Ahmad should be extradited . 
Mr. Ahmad 's lawyer said he would appeal . 
Lawyers close to the case said they believed the ruling was unprecedented . 
`` Up until now the courts have said it is not their role to supervise the foreign country 's courts , '' said Jacques Semmelman , the assistant U.S. attorney on the case . 
FORMER CANADIAN AMBASSADOR to the U.S. Allan E. Gotlieb has joined the Philadelphia law firm of Pepper , Hamilton & Scheetz as a consultant . 
Mr. Gotlieb , who serves as a consultant to Stikeman , Elliott , one of Canada 's biggest law firms , is advising Pepper Hamilton 's Washington office on legal matters related to Canadian-U.S. investment , corporate finance and international transactions . 
QUOTABLE : 
In a speech prepared for delivery in New York yesterday , retired Justice Lewis Powell contested the notion that the last Supreme Court term marked a turn toward conservatism : `` Commentators who agreed on little else unanimously proclaimed a ` shift in direction ' on the court ... . 
I take these pronouncements , like many that have preceded them in past years , with a grain of salt . 
In an era of ` sound bites ' and instant opinion polls it is dangerous to apply broad labels to a single term . 
( During its centennial year , The Wall Street Journal will report events of the past century that stand as milestones of American business history . ) 
THE YOM KIPPUR WAR , WHEN EGYPT CRASHED into Israel on Oct. 6 , 1973 , the holiest day in the Jewish calendar , lasted barely a month . 
But one far-afield effect is still with us . 
The Arab states , always bitterly resentful of U.S. support toward Israel , realized they held an irresistable weapon -- oil . 
Early in October , six Arab nations in the Persian Gulf jacked up prices sharply . 
On Oct. 22 , led by Saudi Arabia , the world 's largest exporter , they embargoed oil shipments to the U.S. and to the Netherlands , Israel 's staunchest European ally . 
The timing was perfect . 
The Arabs had tried embargos before . 
In 1956 , when Britain , France and Israel invaded Egypt to seize the Suez Canal , Arab producers cut off supplies to Europe . 
Texas simply pumped harder . 
U.S. oil supplies , however , had peaked in 1970 and 1971 and by 1973 were declining . 
Imports , then six million barrels a day , came primarily from Venezuela and Canada . 
But Middle East supplies were growing in importance . 
By 1973 , the U.S. was bringing in two million barrels of Arab oil a day , more than 10 % of the 17.3 million barrels consumed daily . 
Politics and economics conspired . 
Japan and Europe , far more dependent on Mideast oil than the U.S. , would n't offend the Arabs or trade off their precious supplies . 
The U.S. did manage to supply the Dutch with oil by relabeling supplies ; once oil is shipped , no one can tell its source . 
But car-happy Americans panicked , and so did the U.S. and other oil-consuming governments . 
`` Shortage '' and `` crisis '' became buzz words , although neither really applied . 
The spot dislocations that showed up were largely the result of confusion ( much of it in Washington ) , though that was cold comfort for drivers waiting in mile-long lines at the gas pumps . 
The embargo lasted only six months , but the price hikes became a fact of life . 
What the Arabs started , inflation finished . 
Once and for all , $ 5-a-barrel crude oil and 35-cents-a-gallon gasoline were history . 
Times may be tough on Wall Street for some , but a few bosses are making as much as ever -- or more . 
At Bear Stearns Cos. , for example , the 15 executive officers led by Chairman Alan `` Ace '' Greenberg got a pay increase to $ 35.9 million for the 14-month period ended June 30 from $ 22.9 million for the 12 months ended April 30 , 1988 . 
The figures do n't include substantial dividends on holdings of Bear Stearns stock . 
Mr. Greenberg himself was paid $ 4.5 million , before an estimated $ 1.5 million in dividends , up from $ 2.4 million the year before . 
The increase is noted in the brokerage firm 's latest proxy statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission . 
Because it operates on a fiscal year , Bear Stearns 's yearly filings are available much earlier than those of other firms . 
The latest period includes 14 months instead of 12 because Bear Stearns changed to a fiscal year ending in June instead of April . 
Meanwhile , Bear Stearns 's 650 stock and bond salesmen saw thinner paychecks over the past year , which the company says reflected lower commission revenue caused by a decline in investor activity in the markets . 
However , Bear Stearns on Monday reported improved earnings for its first quarter , ended Sept. 29 , partly because of a 31 % increase in commissions during the quarter . 
William J. Montgoris , chief financial officer , defended the lofty salaries at Bear Stearns . 
`` All of us are on a base salary of $ 200,000 if the firm makes nothing -- and that 's pretty low as far as Wall Street goes , '' Mr. Montgoris said . 
However , Bear Stearns has never had an unprofitable year since its founding 65 years ago . 
Four Bear Stearns executives besides the 62-year-old Mr. Greenberg were paid $ 3 million or more before dividends for the 14 months ended in June . 
According to the proxy statement , James E. Cayne , 55 , Bear Stearns 's president , made $ 3.9 million ; an executive vice president , Michael L. Tarnopol , 53 , made nearly $ 3.4 million ; and two executive vice presidents , Vincent J. Mattone , 44 , and William J. Michaelcheck , 42 , made about $ 3.3 million each . 
Mr. Montgoris said the firm has a `` straight mathematical formula '' for determining compensation , based on the firm 's earnings . 
`` Just because a particular element of the firm is down , '' such as stockbrokerage , `` does n't mean the executive committee should be paid less , '' he said . 
Morgan Grenfell Group PLC said John Craven , group chief executive officer , is taking over the chairmanship of the merchant banking group from Sir Peter Carey , who is retiring . 
Mr. Carey will remain a member of the merchant bank 's board . 
Mr. Craven is widely credited with refocusing Morgan Grenfell 's energies on its core corporate finance , fund management and banking activities over the past year . 
Last year , Morgan Grenfell shut down its ailing U.K. securities operations . 
Mr. Craven said his move to the chairmanship means he will take a less active role in the day-to-day management of the group , but he added that the merchant bank 's strategic focus remains unchanged . 
Mr. Craven joined Morgan Grenfell as group chief executive in May 1987 , a few months after the resignations of former Chief Executive Christopher Reeves and other top officials because of the merchant bank 's role in Guinness PLC 's controversial takeover of Distiller 's Co. in 1986 . 
Morgan Grenfell had advised Guinness on the bid , which was surrounded by allegations that Guinness used artificial means to support the bid 's value . 
Morgan Grenfell said Michael Dobson , currently group deputy chief executive , will assume the chief executive position . 
The merchant bank also announced that finance director David Eward is taking early retirement for personal reasons . 
His duties will be taken over by Anthony Richmond-Watson , who has been elected deputy chairman . 
News of Mr. Eward 's retirement comes one day after Morgan said that Christopher Whittington resigned as chairman of Morgan 's banking subsidiary to join a financial services firm . 
Mr. Craven said both Messrs. Eward and Whittington had planned to leave the bank earlier , but Mr. Craven had persuaded them to remain until the bank was in a healthy position . 
`` If there 's any coincidence about the departures it 's that they are leaving at a time when the business is in reasonably good shape and going forward very well . '' 
Last month , Morgan Grenfell announced its pretax profit rose 49.6 % to # 32.8 million in the first half , boosted by a healthy growth in its domestic and international corporate finance business . 
The following were among yesterday 's offerings and pricings in the U.S. and non-U.S. capital markets , with terms and syndicate manager , as compiled by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report : 
Lockheed Corp. -- $ 300 million of 9 3\/8 % notes due Oct. 15 , 1999 , priced at 99.90 to yield 9.39 % . 
The issue was priced at a spread of 137.5 basis points above the Treasury 's 10-year note . 
Rated single-A-3 by Moody 's Investors Service Inc. and single-A by Standard & Poor 's Corp. , the issue will be sold through underwriters led by Goldman , Sachs & Co . 
California Health Facilities Financing Authority -- $ 144.35 million of revenue bonds for Kaiser Permanente , due 19931999 , 2004 , 2008 , 2018 and 2019 , tentatively priced by a PaineWebber Inc. group to yield from 6.25 % in 1993 to 7.227 % in 2018 . 
Serial bonds were priced to yield to 6.80 % in 1999 . 
There are about $ 10 million of 7 % bonds priced at 99 1\/4 to yield 7.081 % in 2004 ; about $ 15 million of 7 % bonds priced at 98 1\/2 to yield 7.145 % in 2008 ; about $ 88.35 million of 7 % bonds priced at 97 1\/4 to yield 7.227 % in 2018 ; and about $ 15 million of 6 3\/4 % bonds priced to yield 7.15 % in 2019 . 
The bonds are rated double-A-2 by Moody 's and double-A by S&P , according to the lead underwriter . 
Pennsylvania Higher Education Facilities Authority -- approximately $ 117 million of revenue bonds for Hahnemann University , Series 1989 , due 1990-2002 , 2009 and 2019 , priced late Monday by a Merrill Lynch Capital Markets group to yield from 6 % in 1990 to 7.282 % in 2019 . 
Serial bonds were priced to yield from 6 % in 1990 to 7.10 % in 2002 . 
There are about $ 25.6 million of 7.2 % term bonds due 2009 , priced to yield 7.25 % , and about $ 66.8 million of 7.2 % term bonds due 2019 , priced at 99 to yield 7.282 % . 
The bonds are insured and rated triple-A by Moody 's and S&P . 
Connecticut -- $ 100.4 million of general obligation capital appreciation bonds , College Savings Plan , 1989 Series B , priced by a Prudential-Bache Capital Funding group . 
The zero-coupon bonds were priced to yield to maturity from 6.25 % in 1994 to 6.90 % in 2006 , 2007 and 2009 . 
The bonds have received a rating of double-A-1 from Moody 's , and a double-A-plus rating is expected from S&P , the underwriter said . 
Oregon -- $ 100 million of general obligation veterans ' tax notes , Series 1989 , dated Nov. 1 , 1989 , and due Nov. 1 , 1990 , through a Chemical Securities Inc. group . 
The group is offering the notes priced as 6 3\/4 % securities to yield 6.25 % . 
The notes are rated MIG-1 by Moody 's and SP1-plus by S&P . 
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey -- $ 55.8 million of Series C bonds priced by a Prudential-Bache Capital Funding group . 
The bonds , rated single-A by Moody 's and double-A by S&P , were priced to yield from 6.20 % in 1992 to 7.26 % in 2019 . 
All serial bonds are being offered at par except those due 2002 . 
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. -- $ 500 million of Remic mortgage securities being offered in eight classes by Salomon Brothers Inc . 
The offering , Series 104 , is backed by Freddie Mac 9 % securities . 
The issue used at-market pricing . 
Federal National Mortgage Association -- $ 350 million of Remic mortgage securities being offered in 11 classes by Greenwich Capital Markets . 
The offering , Series 1989-82 , is backed by Fannie Mae 9 1\/2 % securities and used at-market pricing . 
The issue brings Fannie Mae 's 1989 Remic issuance to $ 30.2 billion and its total volume to $ 42.3 billion since the program began in April 1987 . 
Hanshin Electric Railway Co . ( Japan ) -- $ 150 million of bonds due Nov. 2 , 1993 , with equity-purchase warrants , indicating a 4 % coupon at par , via Nomura International Ltd . 
Each $ 5,000 bond carries one warrant , exercisable from Nov. 16 , 1989 , through Oct. 19 , 1993 , to buy company shares at an expected premium of 2 1\/2 % to the closing share price when terms are fixed Oct. 24 . 
Toyobo Co . ( Japan ) -- $ 150 million of bonds due Nov. 1 , 1993 , with equity-purchase warrants , indicating a 4 % coupon at par , via Daiwa Europe Ltd . 
Each $ 5000 bond carries one warrant , exercisable from Nov. 15 , 1989 , to Oct. 18 , 1993 , to buy company shares at an expected premium of 2 1\/2 % to the closing share price when terms are fixed Oct. 23 . 
Sammi Steel Co . ( Korea ) -- $ 50 million of bonds due Nov. 8 , 1994 , with equity-purchase warrants , indicating a 1 1\/4 % to 1 3\/4 % coupon at par , via Merrill Lynch International Ltd. and Dong Suh Securities Co . 
Each $ 5,000 bond carries one warrant , exercisable from May 8 , 1991 , through Oct. 8 , 1994 , to buy company shares at an expected premium of 75 % to 85 % to the closing share price when terms are fixed Oct. 18 . 
Redland International Funding PLC ( U.K. parent ) -- 150 million Australian dollars of 15 3\/8 % bonds due Nov. 8 , 1996 , priced at 101 3\/4 to yield 15.44 % less full fees , via JP Morgan Securities Ltd . 
Guaranteed by Redland PLC . 
Fees 2 . 
Tennessee Valley Authority -- A $ 4 billion , three-part offering of power bonds priced through an underwriting group led by First Boston Corp . 
The size of the issue was increased from an originally planned $ 3 billion . 
The first part , consisting of $ 2 billion of bonds due Oct. 1 , 2019 , with a five-year non-call provision , was priced as 8 3\/4 % securities at 96.808 to yield 9.06 % . 
The 30-year issue was priced at a spread of 105 basis points above the Treasury 's 30-year bellwether bond . 
The second part , consisting of $ 1 billion of noncallable bonds due Oct. 1 , 1999 , was priced as 8 3\/8 % securities at 99.691 to yield 8.42 % . 
The 10-year issue was priced at a spread of 43 basis points above the Treasury 's 10-year note . 
The third part , consisting of $ 1 billion of noncallable bonds due Oct. 1 , 1994 , was priced as 8 1\/4 % securities at 99.672 to yield 8.33 % . 
The five-year issue was priced at a spread of 43 basis points above the Treasury 's comparable note . 
The issue is rated triple-A by Moody 's and triple-A by S&P . 
Par Pharmaceutical Inc. said it named its interim president and chief executive officer , Kenneth I. Sawyer , to those posts permanently , and elected him to the board . 
Par also said it was advised by the U.S. attorney for Maryland that it is one of a number of companies being investigated by a federal grand jury for alleged violations of the federal Food , Drug and Cosmetic Act . 
Par , a generic-drug maker that has been plagued by management problems , was already the subject of a federal criminal inquiry into the drug-approval process and a Food and Drug Administration investigation . 
A Par spokesman said he understood the criminal investigation in Maryland relates to matters Par disclosed in July , when Par said it filed false drug information with the FDA . 
At the time , the company said it was recalling one of its drugs and had stopped selling two others . 
The spokesman said he also understood that the inquiry related to the existence of an `` off-the-record '' production book . 
The book noted changes made at the manufacturing level that were n't disclosed to the FDA . 
Par said it is cooperating in the investigation . 
Also yesterday , Ashok Patel , a former Par official who pleaded guilty to providing an FDA employee an illegal gratuity of $ 3,000 , was sentenced by a federal judge in Baltimore to one year of community service and a $ 150,000 fine . 
Mr. Patel also was placed on three years ' probation . 
Mr. Patel resigned as senior vice president of Par in April . 
In July , Par and a 60%-owned unit agreed to plead guilty in that inquiry , as did another former Par official . 
Mr. Sawyer began running the company on an interim basis in late September . 
Par said it selected him for the posts of president and chief executive on a permanent basis because of his experience in the industry and his performance at Par . 
Perry Levine , chairman , said Mr. Sawyer had `` taken significant steps '' to restore the company 's credibility and sense of professionalism and integrity . 
Just after midnight Monday , federal spending started to drop by $ 16 billion . 
What do you say we all close down the poker game , go home and bank the $ 16 billion ? 
That 's essentially what budget director Richard Darman is suggesting , and we think he deserves as much support as he can get . 
If human beings ca n't cut federal spending honestly -- and they ca n't -- let the computers do it . 
Congress , with a measure of White House complicity , has been manipulating the spending accounts for years under the cover of omnibus appropriations bills . 
( Indeed without earlier manipulations , the current sequester of $ 16 billion would have been even larger . ) 
We suspect voters are fed up with the finagling . 
Consider , for instance , that even yesterday 's widely publicized sequester is likely to be traduced if business as usual is allowed to prevail . 
Under the law , Gramm-Rudman 's across-the-board-cuts in federal programs are supposed to be permanent . 
Social Security and spending for poor people are exempted . 
However , the Associated Press 's account of the Monday sequester order signed by President Bush neatly captured the contempt Congress shows toward the notion of a legally binding commitment : 
`` Lawmakers have been saying for weeks that they plan to roll back the cuts as soon as they agree to a compromise on a deficit-cutting bill . '' 
Mr. Darman 's inclination to save the sequester was backed up yesterday by White House Press Secretary Marlin Fitzwater : 
`` There is some feeling here that the cuts are the way to go . 
It will reduce spending in a very effective fashion . '' 
This attitude is being waved away by sophisticates around Washington as little more than tough talk . 
It looks to us like a golden opportunity for George Bush to chop off at the knees all this talk about a timid , unserious presidency . 
Mr. Bush would be acting in the public interest if he let the Washington elites who manipulate these budgets -- the bureaucrats , the lobbyists , the congressional staffers -- live for just one year on a restricted diet . 
Ask Tommy Lasorda ; thin is in . 
Senator Phil Gramm pointed out Monday that in the 20 years before Gramm-Rudman was enacted in 1985 , federal spending grew by about 11 % a year ; since the law , it 's grown at under 5 % annually . 
Another major factor in this positive trend was Ronald Reagan 's decision early in his presidency to fight the budget war on the expenditure side rather than raising taxes . 
George Bush 's continued support of the tax dam sustains this strategy of pressuring Congress to make choices among competing priorities , rather than just saying yes to all the grateful special-interest constituencies that fill the PAC trough . 
If Washington 's elites ever succeed in bursting the tax dam , Americans will be engulfed in a red sea of new spending programs , such as federalized child care . 
Child care was one of the many `` extraneous '' bills pulled out of the Senate 's reconciliation bill last Friday . 
Others were the capital-gains cut , Section 89 repeal , the disabled workers bill , and the unprecedented reconsideration of the catastrophic health act . 
All this stuff still is in the House 's 1,878-page reconciliation bill , and many Members say they 're reluctant to pull out cherished bills , just to see them die . 
Republicans especially want a guarantee from the House leadership that they 'll get an up-or-down vote on the bills . 
House Speaker Foley ought to deliver that promise . 
This is the way government is supposed to work , with politicians taking responsibility for votes that their constituents can identify , instead of concealing them in the great reconciliation garbage truck . 
We have as much nostalgia as anyone for those leafy , breezy days in Washington when honorable men and women dickered over budgets and even log-rolled a bit to see that the bridges got build , roads paved , soldiers paid or that the desperately poor were cared for . 
Those days are gone . 
Nor do we see any reason to believe that a metropolitan Washington that has gotten fat and rich and lazy in the shadow of the federal colossus will change much on its own initiative . 
Save the sequester , and let Washington scream . 
The New York Stock Exchange said a seat sold for $ 436,000 , down $ 39,000 from the previous sale Oct. 4 . 
Seats are currently quoted at $ 425,000 bid and $ 475,000 offered . 
The $ 475,000 sale price earlier this month was the lowest in nearly three years . 
Exchange seats hit a peak of $ 1,150,000 in September 1987 . 
The Canadian government auctioned 750 million Canadian dollars ( US$ 637.5 million ) of 9.25 % bonds due Dec. 15 , 1994 . 
The average accepted yield bid was 9.617 % for a price equivalent of 98.523 . 
Proceeds of the sale will be used to redeem C$ 675 million of government bonds maturing Nov. 1 and for general government purposes . 
Northern Trust Corp. said its board adopted a shareholder rights plan aimed at deterring unwanted takeover bids , but said it 's not aware of any plan to acquire the banking concern . 
Under Northern Trust 's plan , shareholders were issued rights that , in the event of certain attempted takeovers , allow holders to buy shares in the company at half price . 
National Patent Development Corp. said it plans to purchase as many as 200,000 common shares of its 81%-controlled Interferon Sciences Inc. unit in periodic , open-market purchases . 
The 200,000 shares are about 23 % of Interferon 's common shares outstanding , excluding National Patent 's stake . 
Noting the recent Food and Drug Administration approval of Interferon 's genital warts treatment , National Patent said it believes Interferon 's stock is undervalued . 
Japanese investors , reassured by Monday 's strong rally on Wall Street , erased most of that day 's losses on the Tokyo Stock Exchange . 
But analysts said the rebound did n't remove the cautious mood from the market . 
In London , stocks closed lower in volatile trading as an opening rally was obliterated by worse-than-expected U.S. trade figures . 
Paris shares had a similar reaction , but most other European bourses posted gains , as did all major Asian and Pacific stock markets . 
Tokyo 's Nikkei Index of 225 stocks jumped 527.39 points to close at 34996.08 . 
The rise came a day after the year 's biggest drop on Monday , when the Nikkei fell 647.33 , or 1.8 % , in response to Friday 's 6.9 % plunge on Wall Street . 
In early trading Wednesday in Tokyo , the Nikkei index rose 19.30 points to 35015.38 . 
On Tuesday , the broader-based Tokyo Stock Price Index of issues listed in the first section , which fell 45.66 Monday , rose 41.76 , or 1.61 % , to 2642.64 . 
Trading was relatively thin at an estimated 650 million shares , though brisker than Monday 's 526 million . 
Advancing issues outnumbered decliners 821-201 , with 103 unchanged . 
`` We 're back to square one , '' said Simon Smithson , an analyst in Japan for Kleinwort Benson International Inc . 
Japanese domestic institutions , including trust banks and investment management firms , that had been on the sidelines during Monday 's fall were back in the market , analysts said . 
Foreign investors reportedly started off selling but later joined in the buying . 
The Tokyo rally seemed to confirm the view , frequently expressed in Japan in the past few days , that the drop in New York was a local problem related to merger and acquisition activity in the U.S. . 
`` This time we do n't really have to worry about Tokyo , '' said an official at Daiwa Securities Co . 
`` Nothing has changed fundamentally in the Tokyo market . '' 
But even though Tokyo appears unharmed by recent market volatility , analysts and traders say there are still a few concerns on the horizon . 
In particular , Japanese investors will be keeping a wary eye on Wall Street to see whether Monday 's 88.12-point rally holds up as fresh U.S. economic data are released . 
`` People are placing small bets . 
There 's no huge buying , '' said Stephen Hill , head of equity sales at Jardine Fleming Securities Ltd. in Tokyo . 
`` Really brave views right now would be foolhardy . '' 
Yesterday 's buyers favored real estate , construction and other large-capitalization issues , reflecting the fact that many Tokyo investors now feel safer with domestically oriented stocks , analysts said . 
They also are concerned about the persistent strength of the dollar against the yen , as a weaker yen leads to higher import prices in Japan and adds to domestic inflationary pressures . 
Currency concerns also weigh heavily on interest rate-sensitive stocks such as banking and other financial issues because of fears that Japanese interest rates might have to rise to keep the dollar in check . 
Among steel shares , NKK rose 19 to 705 yen ( $ 4.97 ) a share , and Nippon Steel gained 17 to 735 . 
Construction shares that gained included Shimizu , which rose 130 to 2,080 . 
In the real estate sector , Mitsui Real Estate Development was up 100 at 2,760 , and Mitsubishi Estate gained 80 to 2,360 . 
London 's Financial Times-Stock Exchange 100-share index fell 27.9 points to 2135.5 . 
It was down more than 40 points a half-hour before the close , marking a 61.5-point turnaround from its high , reached in the first 15 minutes of trading . 
The narrower Financial Times 30-share index fell 29.6 to 1730.7 . 
Volume was an active 643.3 million shares , about double the recent levels but down from 959.3 million the previous day , which U.K. traders have dubbed `` Manic Monday . '' 
Prices opened strongly on the basis of Monday 's Wall Street rally and yesterday 's gains in Tokyo . 
But the advance faltered as index-options traders and investors jittery about the U.K. economic outlook took over . 
The unexpectedly wide U.S. August trade deficit of $ 10.77 billion hit an already jittery U.K. market in midafternoon . 
Michael Hicks , who manages sales and trading for brokerage concern Societe Generale Strauss Turnbull , said : `` It 's a nervous market . 
It was all over the place . 
If you bought , you wish you had n't , and if you sold , you wish you had n't . '' 
He said the current market `` is all about sentiment , and the sentiment in London is 90 % anxiety and worry . '' 
Britain 's economic fundamentals , he said , `` do n't look very bright . '' 
Dealers said London showed signs of calming in midafternoon after Wall Street avoided sharp losses despite the trade report , but a wave of futures-related selling later in the session sent buyers back to the sidelines . 
Still , some sectors found buying interest after being actively sold in recent weeks . 
Merchant banks were stronger across the board . 
Morgan Grenfell , which has been mentioned in takeover rumors , rose 20 to 392 pence ( $ 6.18 ) a share . 
S.G. Warburg , a rumored target of some European banking concerns , finished 22 higher at 400 . 
Hambros rose 5 to 204 , and Schroders rose 25 to # 12.75 . 
On the corporate front , Ford Motor announced that it raised its stake in U.K. luxury car maker Jaguar to 10.4 % from 5 % . 
Jaguar shares jumped 23 before easing to close at 654 , up 6 . 
Amstrad , a British computer hardware and communications equipment maker , eased 4 to 47 . 
It announced a 52 % plunge in pretax profit for the latest year . 
Brewery stocks were firm to higher on talk of early bargain-hunting , but most ended below their peaks . 
Bass ended up 3 higher at 966 , Guinness closed at 589 , down 7 , and Scottish & Newcastle dropped 11 to 359 , but Whitbread Class A shares rose 17 to 363 . 
Dealers said there was late talk of a Whitbread sale of brewing operations to Scottish & Newcastle . 
The most active shares were major blue-chips , particularly oils and utilities such as British Gas and British Telecommunications . 
Traders attributed the action in them largely to defensive positioning in a volatile market . 
British Gas finished at 197 , down 2 , on 13 million shares , British Petroleum fell 8 to 291 on 9.4 million shares , and British Telecom was 4 lower at 261 on turnover of 10 million shares . 
Cable & Wireless fell 20 to 478 . 
Also in active trading , British Steel fell 1 to 124 as 20 million shares changed hands . 
Racal Electric , which traded 11 million shares , declined 12 to 218 . 
In other European markets , share prices closed sharply higher in Frankfurt and Zurich and posted moderate rises in Stockholm , Amsterdam and Milan . 
Paris closed lower , and most Brussels shares were unable to trade for a second consecutive day because of technical problems . 
South African gold stocks closed higher . 
Elsewhere , share prices rebounded in Hong Kong , Sydney , Singapore , Wellington , Taipei , Manila and Seoul . 
In Hong Kong , Sydney and Singapore -- the largest of those exchanges -- stocks recovered one-third to one-half of the ground they lost in Monday 's plunge , with major market indexes posting gains of 3.6 % to 4.4 % . 
Here are price trends on the world 's major stock markets , as calculated by Morgan Stanley Capital International Perspective , Geneva . 
To make them directly comparable , each index is based on the close of 1969 equaling 100 . 
The percentage change is since year-end . 
Zurn Industries Inc. said it received approval to proceed on four separate projects with a total contract value of $ 59 million . 
The projects include construction of a 29,400 kilowatt waste-to-energy plant for Ada Cogeneration L.P. , Ada , Mich. ; a steam generating plant at Ontario , Calif. , that Zurn will own and operate , and two waste-water control projects in Orange County , Calif . 
AVX Corp. and Unitrode Corp. said they completed the previously reported sale of Unitrode 's San Diego-based Passive Components division to AVX . 
AVX , a New York-based maker of passive electronic products , paid $ 11 million in cash to Unitrode , a Lexington-based maker of semiconductor products . 
Passive Components makes capacitors and filters used to protect electronics . 
Consolidated Papers Inc. said it plans to spend $ 495 million on new paper-manufacturing equipment and facilities . 
The producer of paper used in magazines and by commercial printers said spending on the expansion is planned to begin in the first quarter of 1990 . 
The expansion is subject to approval by federal and Wisconsin environmental regulators . 
THE STOCK of Applied Power Inc. , which split 2-for-1 in May , has risen since August 1988 . 
In yesterday 's edition , it was incorrectly stated that the company 's share price has softened since August 1988 . 
The stock market 's dizzying gyrations during the past few days have made a lot of individual investors wish they could buy some sort of insurance . 
After all , they wo n't soon forget the stock bargains that became available after the October 1987 crash . 
But while they want to be on the alert for similar buying opportunities now , they 're afraid of being hammered by another terrifying plunge . 
The solution , at least for some investors , may be a hedging technique that 's well known to players in the stock-options market . 
Called a `` married put , '' the technique is carried out by purchasing a stock and simultaneously buying a put option on that stock . 
It 's like `` fire insurance , '' says Harrison Roth , the senior options strategist at Cowen & Co . 
Because a put option gives its owner the right , but not the obligation , to sell a fixed number of shares of the stock at a stated price on or before the option 's expiration date , the investor is protected against a sudden drop in the stock 's price . 
But most investment advisers do n't recommend using married puts all the time . 
That 's because the cost of buying put options eats into an investor 's profit when stock prices rise . 
`` This is the type of fire insurance you only buy when the nearby woods are on fire , '' says Mr. Roth . 
`` You always want your house insured , but you do n't always feel the need for your investments to be insured . '' 
In addition to hedging new stock purchases , the married-put technique can be used to protect stocks that an investor already owns . 
In either case , the investor faces three possible outcomes : 
-- If the stock goes up in price between now and the put 's expiration date , the put will probably expire worthless . 
The investor will be out the cost of the put , which is called the `` premium , '' and this loss will reduce the stock-market profit . 
-- If the stock stays at the same price between now and the put 's expiration date , the investor 's loss will be limited to the cost of the put , less any amount realized from a closing sale of the put . 
The worst-case scenario would be if the put expires worthless . 
-- If the price of the stock declines , the put will increase in value . 
Once the stock price is less than the exercise price , or `` strike price , '' of the put , the gain will match the loss on the stock dollar for dollar . 
The put establishes a minimum selling price for the stock during its life . 
When a stock falls below the put 's strike price , the investor simply sells the stock at a loss and simultaneously sells the put at a profit . 
Or , the investor can exercise the put , by tendering the stock to his or her broker in return for payment from another investor who has sold a put on the same stock . 
Brokers handle such transactions through the Options Clearing Corp. , which guarantees all option trades . 
The accompanying table shows how this strategy would work for three stocks . 
Though not reflected in the table , an investor should know that the cost of the option insurance can be partially offset by any dividends that the stock pays . 
For example , Tenneco Inc. pays a quarterly dividend of 76 cents , which would be received before the February option expires and , thus , reduce the cost of using the technique by that amount . 
In this case , the investor 's risk would n't exceed 3.6 % of the total investment . 
To simplify the calculations , commissions on the option and underlying stock are n't included in the table . 
There are more than 650 stocks on which options may be bought and sold , including some over-the-counter stocks . 
But some investors might prefer a simpler strategy then hedging their individual holdings . 
They can do this by purchasing `` index puts , '' which are simply put options on indexes that match broad baskets of stocks . 
For instance , the most popular index option is the S&P 100 option , commonly called the OEX . 
It is based on the stocks that make up Standard & Poor 's 100-stock index . 
Unlike options on individual issues , index options are settled only in cash , and no stock is ever tendered . 
But while index options are convenient , they have several disadvantages . 
For one thing , an investor 's portfolio might not closely match the S&P 100 . 
As a result , the OEX insurance may or may not fully protect an investor 's holdings in the event of a market decline . 
In addition , OEX options were suspended from trading last Friday afternoon , after the stock-market sell-off got under way and trading in the S&P-500 futures contract was halted . 
So an investor who wanted to realize a profit on OEX puts after the trading suspension would have been out of luck . 
On the other hand , only a handful of individual issues were suspended from trading on Friday . 
Normally , once the underlying investment is suspended from trading , the options on those investments also do n't trade . 
Ultimately , whether the insurance provided by purchasing puts is worthwhile depends on the cost of the options . 
That cost rises in times of high market volatility . 
But it still might be cheaper than taking a major hit . 
The protection from using married puts is clearly superior to that afforded by another options strategy some investors consider using during troubled times : selling call options on stocks the investor owns . 
A call option is similar to a put , except that it gives its owner the right to buy shares at a stated price until expiration . 
Selling a call option gives an investor a small buffer against a stock-market decline . 
That 's because it reduces the cost of the stock by the amount of premium received from the sale of the call . 
But if the price of the stock rises above the strike price of the option , the stock is almost certain to be called away . 
And in that case , the investor misses out on any major upside gain . 
These calculations exclude the effect of commissions paid and dividends received from the stock . 
All prices are as of Monday 's close . 
Hopes for quick enactment of pending deficit-reduction legislation faded as efforts to streamline the House version in advance of a House-Senate conference broke down . 
House leaders had hoped to follow the Senate 's lead by getting an agreement from House committee chairmen under which they would drop items that would n't reduce the fiscal 1990 budget deficit from the House-passed bill before the negotiations with the Senate began . 
But the effort became snagged on the question of what would become of other issues , ranging from cutting the capital-gains tax to child care to repeal of catastrophic-illness insurance . 
`` Many members feel there are important features of the House bill that should be enacted , '' Speaker Thomas Foley ( D. , Wash . ) said . 
`` If there is any support for reducing the bill , it is conditioned on their desire to see them passed in another form . '' 
Now those items will be discussed in a House-Senate conference , which could begin as soon as today , with the expectation that they could either be resolved there or placed into other legislation . 
`` You 've got to give these chairmen the opportunity to see if they can work things out , '' said House Budget Committee Chairman Leon Panetta ( D. , Calif . ) . 
`` This is a democratic process -- you ca n't slam-dunk anything around here . '' 
White House Budget Director Richard Darman has said he would continue to press to keep the capital-gains provision in the final version of the bill unless the House drops many of its costly provisions . 
Senate leaders had hoped to be able to send a compromise version of the measure to President Bush by the end of the week , but Speaker Foley said that was n't likely . 
Failure to pass the bill meant that $ 16.1 billion in across-the-board spending cuts took effect Monday under the Gramm-Rudman budget law . 
The bill must be enacted before the cuts can be restored . 
TRADING VOLUME in Standard & Poor 's 500 stock-index futures contracts on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange Monday totaled 73,803 contracts . 
Yesterday 's edition incorrectly reported Monday 's trading volume as a record for the S&P 500 contract . 
NCNB Corp. raised $ 1 billion in new capital during the third quarter . 
In yesterday 's edition , the amount of new capital was misstated . 
McCormick Capital Inc. said its tender offer to buy back as many as 1.1 million , or 44 % , of its common shares at $ 3 apiece , which expired Friday evening , was oversubscribed . 
The developer and manager of futures-investment limited partnerships said preliminary results indicate that about 1,749,000 shares had been tendered , giving a preliminary proration factor of 0.6287 . 
The final proration factor will be announced Monday . 
Northgate Exploration Ltd. said it is proposing to amalgamate four of its associated companies . 
Under a proposed two-step amalgamation involving share swaps , ABM Gold Corp. , a gold exploration and management company , will merge with Neptune Resources Corp. , United Gold Corp. and Inca Resources Inc . 
ABM will also increase its stake in Sonora Gold Corp. to 42 % from 26 % . 
Northgate said it will own about 50 % of the equity and 81 % of the votes of ABM after the amalgamation . 
The amalgamations are subject to regulatory approval and require approval by shareholders of ABM , Inca , United and Neptune at special meetings on Nov. 10 . 
Steven C. Walker , senior vice president of this bank holding company , was named president , chief executive officer and a director of both Commercial National and Commercial National Bank . 
He succeeds James E. Burt III , who resigned from all three posts to pursue other interests . 
A surprising surge in the U.S. trade deficit raised fears that the nation 's export drive has stalled , and caused new turmoil in financial markets . 
The merchandise trade deficit widened in August to $ 10.77 billion , the Commerce Department reported , a sharp deterioration from July 's $ 8.24 billion and the largest deficit of any month this year . 
Exports fell for the second month in a row , while imports rose to a record . 
`` This is one of the worst trade releases we 've had since the dollar troughed out in 1987 , '' said Geoffrey Dennis , chief international economist at James Capel Inc . 
Like most analysts , Mr. Dennis was hesitant to read too much into one month 's numbers ; but he said , `` It indicates perhaps that the balance in the U.S. economy is not as good as we 've been led to believe . '' 
The number had a troubling effect on Wall Street , suggesting that more fundamental economic problems may underlie last Friday 's stock market slide . 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average tumbled more than 60 points after the report 's release , before recovering to close 18.65 points lower at 2638.73 . 
`` This bad trade number raises some deeper issues about the market decline , '' said Norman Robertson , chief economist for Mellon Bank . 
`` It raises questions about more deep-seated problems , the budget deficit and the trade deficit and the seeming lack of ability to come to grips with them . '' 
The trade report drew yet another unsettling parallel to October 1987 . 
On Oct. 14 of that year , the announcement of an unusually large August trade deficit helped trigger a steep market decline . 
The slide continued until the record 508-point market drop on Oct. 19 . 
In 1987 , however , the news was the latest in a string of disappointments on trade , while the current report comes after a period of improvement . 
The bleak trade report was played down by the Bush administration . 
Commerce Secretary Robert Mosbacher called the worsening trade figures `` disappointing after two very good months . '' 
And White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said the deficit was `` an unwelcome increase , '' adding that `` we 're hopeful that it simply is a one-month situation and will turn around . '' 
But the figures reinforced the view of many private analysts that the improvement in the U.S. trade deficit has run out of steam . 
`` The figures today add further evidence to support the view that the improvement in the U.S. trade deficit has essentially stalled out at a level of about a $ 110 billion annual rate , '' said Jeffrey Scott , a research fellow at the Institute for International Economics here . 
`` That 's still an improvement over last year , but it leads one to conclude that basically we 've gotten all the mileage we can out of past dollar depreciation and past marginal cuts in the federal budget deficit . '' 
Exports declined for the second consecutive month in August , slipping 0.2 % to $ 30.41 billion , the Commerce Department reported . 
Imports , on the other hand , leaped 6.4 % to a record $ 41.18 billion . 
Not only was August 's deficit far worse than July 's , but the government revised the July figure substantially from the $ 7.58 billion deficit it had initially reported last month . 
Many economists contend that deep cuts in the U.S. budget deficit are needed before further trade improvement can occur . 
That 's because the budget deficit feeds an enormous appetite in this country for both foreign goods and foreign capital , overwhelming the nation 's capacity to export . 
`` People are sick and tired of hearing about these deficits , but the imbalances are still there and they are still a problem , '' said Mr. Robertson . 
In addition , the rise in the value of the dollar against foreign currencies over the past several months has increased the price of U.S. products in overseas markets and hurt the country 's competitiveness . 
Since March , exports have been virtually flat . 
At the same time , William T. Archey , international vice president at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , notes : `` Clearly the stronger dollar has made imports more attractive '' by causing their prices to decline . 
Most economists expect the slowing U.S. economy to curb demand for imports . 
But they foresee little substantial progress in exports unless the dollar and the federal budget deficit come down . 
`` The best result we could get from these numbers would be to see the administration and Congress get serious about putting the U.S. on an internationally competitive economic footing , '' said Howard Lewis , vice president of international economic affairs at the National Association of Manufacturers . 
`` That must start with cutting the federal budget deficit . '' 
August 's decline in exports reflected decreases in sales of industrial supplies , capital goods and food abroad and increases in sales of motor vehicles , parts and engines . 
The jump in imports stemmed from across-the-board increases in purchases of foreign goods . 
The numbers were adjusted for usual seasonal fluctuations . 
Alan Murray contributed to this article . 
( In billions of U.S. dollars , not seasonally adjusted ) 
\* Newly industrialized countries : Singapore , Hong Kong , Taiwan , South Korea 
Steve Jobs took a step back from the frontier of personal-computer technology in an effort to spur sales of Next Inc. 's new machine . 
Mr. Jobs moved to remedy a couple of his computer 's drawbacks yesterday by lowering the entry-level price for a Next machine by $ 1,500 , or 23 % , if the buyer chooses a hard-disk drive as an alternative to Next 's optical-storage device . 
The hard drive , which is the storage device of choice for virtually every desktop computer user , also now will supplement Next 's futuristic optical device if buyers pay full price . 
Mr. Jobs , co-founder of Apple Computer Inc. , founded Next four years ago in the hopes of fomenting a revolution in the way desktop computers are designed and used . 
His Next computer , introduced about a year ago and aimed primarily at university computer users , sports snazzy graphics , digital sound , built-in networking and a sleek black design . 
But the computer was proving a hard sell because of its high price , a lack of software and an optical data-storage device that was too slow . 
The machine began shipping at the end of last year . 
The closely held company has n't disclosed sales . 
However , most universities that have bought the machines say they are buying small numbers for evaluation purposes . 
Universities can now buy a Next computer without an optical storage device for $ 4,995 . 
A computer with the optical device will still cost $ 6,495 , but from now on Next will outfit every computer with a hard drive and supply one at no cost to those who have already bought Next machines . 
Commercial customers can purchase the same system through Businessland Inc. , a computer retailer based in San Jose , Calif. , for roughly $ 3,000 more . 
Mr. Jobs said the changes were prompted by requests from customers who are frustrated with the performance of the optical device , which is n't offered as standard equipment by any rivals . 
Another factor was that customers were asking , `` Why do n't you give us a cheaper system ? '' Mr. Jobs said at a conference on university computing here . 
Optical-storage devices can handle very large amounts of data and make it far easier to edit film clips or audio recordings with a computer . 
But the technology , while reliable , is far slower than the widely used hard drives . 
To get around the delays caused by the optical device , Businessland , which is Next 's exclusive dealer to corporations , has for months been advising customers to purchase hard drives with the machines . 
Next 's decision to rely on the more-established hard drive in every Next computer does n't signal a retreat from optical storage , said Mr. Jobs , who for years has said this technology will play a crucial role in the next decade . 
`` We 're extremely committed to optical storage technology '' he said . 
`` We think everything will go this way in a few years . '' 
He said that the next generation of optical drives will be as fast as hard drives , but he depends on outside suppliers for the devices . 
But university computer specialists , who welcomed the move , called it a necessary retreat from the cutting edge of technology and one that 's likely to increase Next 's sales on campuses . 
`` From the standpoint of being on the forefront of technology , this is a step backward , '' said Jerry W. Sprecher , a senior computing manager for the California state university system . 
`` But it will definitely boost Next 's sales . '' 
Universities , however , say Next 's prices must go even lower before large numbers of students purchase the machine . 
`` We 'd still like to see a student model , '' priced at about $ 3,500 , said Ronald Johnson , director of academic computing at Minnesota 's Gustavus Adolphus College , which has bought eight Next machines . 
Broad acceptance of Next 's computer also is hindered by difficulty in distributing software for it . 
Most software is distributed on cheap floppy disks , but the Next computer does n't come with a device that reads them . 
Next 's computer also needs more software applications , but Mr. Jobs said he expects more soon . 
He said he expects Lotus Development Corp. to introduce a Next version of its popular 1-2-3 spreadsheet program in 1990 . 
Educators added that Next needs to soon offer a color version of its computer . 
Every major maker offers computers with color displays . 
Next wo n't comment on when it will do the same , but is believed to have a color model under development . 
Donald J. Amaral , 37 years old , was named president and chief operating officer of this owner and operator of hospitals , nursing centers and retirement hotels . 
He succeeds as president , Don Freeberg , who remains chairman and chief executive officer . 
The position of chief operating officer is new . 
Ashton-Tate Corp. reported a net loss of $ 19.4 million , or 74 cents a share , for the third quarter , which was burdened by severance costs and the expense of upgrading its database software inventories . 
The software company said revenue slid 28 % to $ 53.9 million . 
This contrasts with the year-ago quarter , when the company had net income of $ 11.7 million , or 45 cents a share , on revenue of $ 75.7 million . 
For the nine months , Ashton-Tate had a loss of $ 27.6 million , or $ 1.05 a share . 
In the year-ago period , the company had profit of $ 34.3 million , or $ 1.32 a share . 
Revenue in the period slid almost 8 % to $ 203.2 million from about $ 220 million last year . 
Edward M. Esber , chairman , president and chief executive officer , attributed the decline to reduced domestic revenue because of $ 4.9 million spent to upgrade existing software inventories to the new database IV Version 1.1 , and $ 1.8 million spent on the recent reduction in work force . 
He said the company was `` encouraged by feedback '' it received from selected customers now testing Version 1.1 . 
The red ink came as no surprise to Wall Street , but analysts said they saw ominous hints of a further delay in volume shipments of Version 1.1 , a harbinger of continued losses in the fourth quarter . 
`` The loss is in line with our expectations , '' said John C. Maxwell III , an analyst with Dillon , Read & Co. in New York . 
He added gross margins and operating profit `` eroded quite dramatically '' from the prior quarter , along with sales of existing software product lines like Multimate and Framework . 
`` The success of a new product in the database line is needed . 
And while the company has n't made a definite statement , it now looks like that 's not going to be anytime soon , '' Mr. Maxwell said . 
The company said in a statement that it expects to ship new products `` during the next two quarters . '' 
`` It now looks like database IV Version 1.1 is n't going to be { widely } available until the first quarter of 1990 , '' said David Bayer , an analyst with Montgomery Securities in San Francisco . 
`` This is the second delay now in getting the product out the door . 
It does prolong the pain somewhat . '' 
Mr. Maxwell said unless the company can start shipments of the new product sometime this quarter , the fourth-quarter loss is likely to be `` comparable to the third quarter 's . '' 
If the company can start to ship during this quarter , it could stem some , if not all of the red ink , he said . 
In national over-the-counter trading , Ashton-Tate closed yesterday at $ 10 a share , up 62.5 cents . 
Tuesday , October 17 , 1989 
The key U.S. and foreign annual interest rates below are a guide to general levels but do n't always represent actual transactions . 
PRIME RATE : 10 1\/2 % . 
The base rate on corporate loans at large U.S. money center commercial banks . 
FEDERAL FUNDS : 8 11\/16 % high , 8 5\/8 % low , 8 5\/8 % near closing bid , 8 11\/16 % offered . 
Reserves traded among commercial banks for overnight use in amounts of $ 1 million or more . 
Source : Fulton Prebon ( U.S.A . ) Inc . 
DISCOUNT RATE : 7 % . 
The charge on loans to depository institutions by the New York Federal Reserve Bank . 
CALL MONEY : 9 3\/4 % to 10 % . 
The charge on loans to brokers on stock exchange collateral . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER placed directly by General Motors Acceptance Corp. : 8.40 % 30 to 44 days ; 8.325 % 45 to 59 days ; 8.10 % 60 to 89 days ; 8 % 90 to 119 days ; 7.85 % 120 to 149 days ; 7.70 % 150 to 179 days ; 7.375 % 180 to 270 days . 
COMMERCIAL PAPER : High-grade unsecured notes sold through dealers by major corporations in multiples of $ 1,000 : 8.50 % 30 days ; 8.40 % 60 days ; 8.375 % 90 days . 
CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT : 8.05 % one month ; 8.02 % two months ; 8 % three months ; 7.98 % six months ; 7.95 % one year . 
Average of top rates paid by major New York banks on primary new issues of negotiable C.D.s , usually on amounts of $ 1 million and more . 
The minimum unit is $ 100,000 . 
Typical rates in the secondary market : 8.50 % one month ; 8.50 % three months ; 8.45 % six months . 
BANKERS ACCEPTANCES : 8.38 % 30 days ; 8.28 % 60 days ; 8.23 % 90 days ; 8.13 % 120 days ; 8.03 % 150 days ; 7.93 % 180 days . 
Negotiable , bank-backed business credit instruments typically financing an import order . 
LONDON LATE EURODOLLARS : 8 5\/8 % to 8 1\/2 % one month ; 8 9\/16 % to 8 7\/16 % two months ; 8 9\/16 % to 8 7\/16 % three months ; 8 1\/2 % to 8 3\/8 % four months ; 8 7\/16 % to 8 5\/16 % five months ; 8 7\/16 % to 8 5\/16 % six months . 
LONDON INTERBANK OFFERED RATES ( LIBOR ) : 8 5\/8 % one month ; 8 9\/16 % three months ; 8 7\/16 % six months ; 8 7\/16 % one year . 
The average of interbank offered rates for dollar deposits in the London market based on quotations at five major banks . 
FOREIGN PRIME RATES : Canada 13.50 % ; Germany 8.50 % ; Japan 4.875 % ; Switzerland 8.50 % ; Britain 15 % . 
These rate indications are n't directly comparable ; lending practices vary widely by location . 
TREASURY BILLS : Results of the Monday , October 16 , 1989 , auction of short-term U.S. government bills , sold at a discount from face value in units of $ 10,000 to $ 1 million : 7.37 % 13 weeks ; 7.42 % 26 weeks . 
FEDERAL HOME LOAN MORTGAGE CORP . ( Freddie Mac ) : Posted yields on 30-year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days . 
9.88 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 7.875 % , 2 % rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
FEDERAL NATIONAL MORTGAGE ASSOCIATION ( Fannie Mae ) : Posted yields on 30 year mortgage commitments for delivery within 30 days ( priced at par ) 9.80 % , standard conventional fixed-rate mortgages ; 8.70 % , 6\/2 rate capped one-year adjustable rate mortgages . 
Source : Telerate Systems Inc . 
MERRILL LYNCH READY ASSETS TRUST : 8.50 % . 
Annualized average rate of return after expenses for the past 30 days ; not a forecast of future returns . 
Ethyl Corp. reported that third-quarter net income fell 12 % from a year-earlier quarter helped by a gain from discontinued operations . 
Profit from continuing operations rose 19 % . 
The chemicals and insurance company said net in the latest quarter was $ 54.8 million , or 45 cents a share . 
In the year-earlier quarter , net was $ 62.2 million , or 51 cents a share . 
The previous-year quarter included $ 16.1 million from businesses spun off as Tredegar Industries Inc . 
Revenue was $ 613.7 million , up 18 % from $ 521.2 million a year ago . 
Ethyl said pretax profit from its insurance segment , excluding investment gains , rose 28 % in the latest quarter to $ 28.6 million from $ 22.4 million . 
In the chemicals segment , pretax profit rose 7 % to $ 69.2 million from $ 64.9 million . 
The company 's chemicals interests include , among other things , petroleum additives , pharmaceuticals ingredients and polysilicon used by the semiconductor industry . 
For the nine months , Ethyl said net fell 2 % to $ 168.7 million , or $ 1.40 a share , from $ 172.2 million , $ 1.42 a share , a year ago . 
Net in the latest period included $ 11.9 million from discontinued operations and a charge of $ 6.2 million from a plant closing . 
In the year-ago period , net included $ 32.7 million from discontinued operations . 
Revenue was $ 1.79 billion , up 18 % from $ 1.52 billion a year earlier . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Ethyl closed at $ 25.875 a share , up 12.5 cents . 
Tribune Co. , helped by a hefty boost in performance at its broadcasting and entertainment operations , said net income jumped 21 % in its third quarter ended Sept. 24 on a 3 % increase in revenue . 
The broadcasting and newspaper concern , based in Chicago , said net was $ 62.7 million , or 77 cents a primary share , up from $ 51.6 million , or 69 cents a share . 
Per-share figures this year reflect $ 6.8 million in preferred-share dividends ; the 1988 quarter did n't have such a payout . 
Revenue rose to $ 590.7 million from $ 575.1 million . 
Nine-month net climbed 19 % to $ 174.8 million , or $ 2.21 a primary share , from $ 147.5 million , or $ 1.94 a share . 
Nine-month per-share figures for 1989 reflect $ 12.9 million in preferred dividends that had no counterpart in the year-earlier quarter . 
Revenue rose 4 % to $ 1.79 billion . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading Friday , Tribune closed at $ 49.375 , down $ 4.75 . 
Enserch Corp. said about 12 million , or 93 % , of the publicly traded units of its limited partnership , Enserch Exploration Partners Ltd. , were tendered in response to an offer that expired Monday . 
Enserch said the tendered units will raise its ownership of the partnership to more than 99 % from 87 % . 
About 900,000 units will continue to be publicly traded on the New York Stock Exchange , Enserch said . 
Enserch had offered one-half a share of its common and $ 1 in cash for each unit . 
The public sector borrowing requirement , the most widely used measure of Britain 's government deficit or surplus , showed a deficit of # 200 million in September , compared with a deficit of # 765 million in August and a deficit of # 1.08 billion in September 1988 , the Treasury said . 
In the six months since the current fiscal year began April 1 , the surplus totaled # 500 million , compared with a surplus of # 3.6 billion in the year-earlier period . 
The government is projecting a # 14 billion surplus for the fiscal year . 
The reported figures for the public sector borrowing requirement include receipts from the sale of state-owned industries . 
Excluding those receipts , the government deficit would have totaled about # 2.5 billion in the first six months , compared with # 1.3 billion a year earlier , the Treasury said . 
French crude-steel production in September was 1,616,000 metric tons , unchanged from a year earlier , according to the National Steel Manufacturers ' Association . 
The association said the September total brought French output for the first nine months this year to 14,789,000 tons , up 4.5 % from a year earlier . 
Prospect Group Inc. , whose recent hostile tender offer for Recognition Equipment Inc. failed for lack of financing , apparently has gained a measure of control over the troubled company anyway . 
As part of what a Recognition spokeswoman termed an `` amiable agreement , '' Prospect Group will wind up with control of top management posts and an increased stake in the maker of data management equipment . 
In a management restructuring , Thomas L. Ringer resigned as chairman , chief executive and a director , while Israel Sheinberg resigned as a director . 
Mr. Sheinberg remains as executive vice president . 
Thomas M. Hurley and Robert A. Vanourek , who had been designated to take over Recognition 's top spots had Prospect 's tender offer succeeded , were named co-chief executives and directors . 
Mr. Hurley was formerly a vice president and general manager of an Avery International division ; Mr. Vanourek was a former group vice president of Pitney Bowes Inc . 
In addition , the agreement calls for Gilbert H. Lamphere , chairman of Prospect Group 's executive committee , to be named chairman of a restructured board that will include four new independent directors . 
Also named to the revised board was Thomas A. Loose , Recognition 's senior vice president and general counsel . 
Prospect , a New York-based leveraged buy-out firm , also agreed to invest $ 15 million in Recognition , which in turn agreed to repurchase as much as $ 20 million of its stock . 
That would increase Prospect 's ownership of the company 's fully-diluted shares outstanding to 20 % from 14.1 % . 
Under the agreement , Prospect is permitted to increase its stake in Recognition to 30 % . 
Beyond that , Prospect said it would n't offer to acquire additional shares for less than $ 11.25 a share during the next year or less than $ 14.06 a share during the subsequent two years . 
Recognition also said it obtained a commitment from Chemical Bank and Bank of Boston to convert an estimated $ 18 million in bank debt to a new , 24-month secured term loan to be repaid through the sale of certain assets . 
In August , Recognition said it was in violation of certain terms of its debt agreements with bank lenders because of a $ 3.9 million loss for the third quarter ended July 31 . 
The company attributed the loss to declining revenue and litigation costs relating to criminal charges against the company and two former executives , William G. Moore Jr. and Robert W. Reedy . 
The former executives were indicted last October on charges of fraud , theft and conspiracy related to efforts by the company to win $ 400 million in Postal Service contracts . 
Recognition Equipment said it expected to put the agreement with Prospect to a vote of its stockholders at a special meeting in January . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Recognition rose 87.5 cents to $ 6.625 . 
Prospect slipped 25 cents to $ 10.50 in national over-the-counter trading . 
General Motors Corp. 's Chevrolet division , reacting to slow sales , said it will offer $ 800 rebates on its 1990 Beretta , the two-door version of its core compact-car line . 
Sluggish sales of the Beretta , and its four-door sister car , the Corsica , prompted GM to idle the two plants that build the automobiles for a total of three weeks this month . 
The Corsica and Beretta make up the highest-volume car line at Chevrolet , but sales of the vehicles are off 9.6 % for the year , and fell a steep 34 % during early October . 
Chevrolet already is offering an $ 800 rebate on the 1990-model Corsica . 
The latest rebate is good for all Beretta models . 
Chevrolet buyers can take the rebate , or get discount financing at rates ranging from 6.9 % on 24-month loans to 10.9 % on 60-month loans . 
StatesWest Airlines said it submitted an offer to the directors of Mesa Airlines to acquire the Farmington , N.M. , carrier . 
Except to characterize its offer as `` fair and generous and in the best interests of Mesa shareholders , '' StatesWest declined to discuss details of its proposal . 
It also asked Mesa to keep the proposal confidential . 
A Mesa official confirmed receipt of the offer and said directors would meet to consider it . 
Last week , Mesa rejected a proposal by StatesWest to acquire it or merge . 
StatesWest has a 7.25 % stake in Mesa , which operates 20 twin-engine and two single-engine turboprops among 42 cities in New Mexico , Arizona , Wyoming , Colorado and Texas . 
StatesWest operates four twin-engine turboprop aircraft , connecting 10 cities in California , Arizona and Nevada . 
The carrier has n't yet turned a profit . 
The former president of FirstSouth F.A. , a defunct Arkansas thrift , pleaded guilty to conspiring to inflate the institution 's earnings by concealing worthless loan guarantees . 
Roderick D. Reed III , who was also chief operating officer of FirstSouth , could receive a maximum sentence of five years in federal prison and a $ 250,000 fine . 
A sentencing date has n't been set . 
Mr. Reed admitted he conspired to conceal an agreement not to enforce loan guarantees executed by Dallas real-estate developers A. Starke Taylor III and George S. Watson , both of whom were FirstSouth stockholders . 
Neither Mr. Taylor nor Mr. Watson have been charged with criminal wrongdoing . 
By concealing the non-enforcement agreement , certain transactions with Messrs. Taylor and Watson were entered on FirstSouth 's books as loans , allowing the thrift to report fees and interest as current income , according to the U.S. attorney 's office in Little Rock , Ark . 
The conspiracy was part of an effort by Mr. Reed to hide FirstSouth 's shaky financial condition from federal regulators , according to federal prosecutors and regulators . 
The $ 1.68 billion thrift was declared insolvent and closed in December 1986 . 
FirstSouth 's former chairman and chief executive officer , Howard Weichern , is also charged with conspiring to conceal the agreements with Messrs. Watson and Taylor . 
Mr. Weichern is scheduled for trial Jan. 3 before federal Judge Stephen Reasoner of Little Rock . 
I approached `` Mastergate , '' Larry Gelbart 's new comedy at the Criterion Center , with considerable trepidation . 
Nothing , I assumed , would be more hopelessly dated than a political satire on the Iran-Contra affair . 
I had underestimated , however , both Mr. Gelbart 's wit and the persistence of scandal in Washington . 
Though the play clearly is framed around the events of Iran-Contra , it takes in the wide sweep of scandals over the past 30 years . 
In fact , at one point Merry Chase ( Melinda Mullins ) , a cool , carefully coiffed television announcer , recites a list of a dozen or more scandals of recent years , concluding with those affecting the Department of Housing and Urban Development and the savings and loan industry . 
Onstage , a congressional hearing is in progress , complete with elegant crystal chandelier overhead and a lifesize reproduction of the signing of the Constitution in the background . 
The witness table is center stage and below it , the paraphernalia for the ever-present media , in this case TNN , the Total News Network . 
Not only are there camera operators on all sides , but the proceedings are shown on monitors throughout the theater . 
The metaphor of theater is not entirely coincidental . 
Mr. Gelbart clearly feels that all the participants in a congressional hearing -- the witnesses , the lawyers , the interrogators and the news media -- are performers . 
As the story of `` Mastergate '' unfolds , we learn that the Internal Revenue Service confiscated one of the properties of a foreign financier who owes the government millions in taxes . 
The man , it seems , has a Lichtenstein corporation , licensed in Libya and sheltered in the Bahamas . 
He himself lives in a `` consecutive series of unnumbered houses in a town in Switzerland . '' 
The property seized by the IRS is a Hollywood film studio , Master Pictures Incorporated ( MPI ) . 
Supposedly the IRS will sell off the assets of MPI , but before it can , a lowly IRS agent is called into the hospital room of Wylie Slaughter , the dying head of the Central Intelligence Agency . 
The lowly agent , Abel Lamb , who as you might guess , is being led to the slaughter , is ordered to take over the studio . 
Soon the studio is producing a $ 40 million picture called `` Tet , the Motion Picture , '' to distinguish it from `` Tet , the Offensive , '' as well as `` Tet , the Book '' and `` Tet , the Album . '' 
The picture , to be made in the Central American country of San Elvador , is a cover for sending $ 800 million of arms to Los Otros , the rebel group attempting to regain neighboring Ambigua , which has been taken over by the leftist dictator Dr. Overtega , a former podiatrist , who leads a revolutionary band of foot soldiers . 
The man handling all this for the now-deceased Slaughter is Major Manley Battle , Mr. Gelbart 's stand in for Col. Oliver North . 
Director Michael Engler has assembled a top-flight cast to carry out the impersonations of well-known political figures and to play the stock characters who invariably show up at congressional hearings . 
Daniel von Bargen is ramrod-stiff but totally assured as Major Battle , mixing just the right brand of self-righteousness and patriotism ; Jeff Weiss is fire , brimstone and teary-eyed emotionalism as the far-right senator who serves as a friendly interrogator of Major Battle ; Zach Grenier is maddeningly officious playing a succession of lawyers ; Joseph Daly has the perfect `` aw , shucks '' demeanor of George Bush in his portrayal of the vice president ; and Ann McDonough is first-rate as a succession of witnesses ' wives . 
With one she is pregnant , with Major Battle she is knitting an American flag , and as the vice president 's wife she rushes in with white hair , wearing a tailored suit and pearls , imitating Barbara Bush 's gestures down to the last detail . 
Though it 's clear that Mr. Gelbart 's sympathies do not lie with the far right , it 's also true that he is evenhanded in dispensing his satirical jabs , taking sharp aim at senators and congressmen of all stripes and particularly at the media . 
Mr. Gelbart also has fun with language . 
`` Mastergate '' is subtitled `` a play on words , '' and Mr. Gelbart plays that game as well as anyone . 
He describes a Mastergate flunky as one who experienced a `` meteoric disappearance '' and found himself `` handling blanket appeals at the Bureau of Indian Affairs . '' 
This interest in words goes beyond puns and playfulness , however . 
Mr. Gelbart deplores the obfuscation , the circumlocution and the debasement of language he sees on all sides . 
As the hearings begin , the self-important Sen. Bowman ( Jerome Kilty ) announces : `` Let me emphaticize one thing at the outset : We are not looking for hides to skin nor goats to scape . '' 
Major Battle himself speaks in pure Pentagonese : `` Without further monetary-stroke-military aid , scores of Ambiguan freedom lovers , who had gone way out on their life and limbs for us , were literally cut off at the knees without a paddle . '' 
At another point he intones : `` Publicity is a small price to pay for secrecy . '' 
The evening is short -- 95 minutes without an intermission -- but even so , as the play progresses the thrust of Mr. Gelbart 's satire loses its sharpness as his targets pop up ever more predictably . 
Most of the evening , though , is filled with rare and welcome wit . 
In `` Mastergate , '' Mr. Gelbart has provided us not just one but two commodities that have all but disappeared from the Broadway theater : sharp political satire and an even sharper appreciation of the value of language . 
The Federal National Mortgage Association set up a three-member office of the chairman and elected James A. Johnson as vice chairman , effective Jan. 1 . 
Mr. Johnson has been a managing director at Shearson Lehman Hutton since 1985 , and before that was president of Public Strategies , a Washington consulting firm . 
He is well-known in Democratic circles , having been executive assistant to Vice President Walter Mondale and chairman of Mr. Mondale 's 1984 presidential campaign . 
At Fannie Mae , he will take responsibility for the corporation 's financial and legal areas and will work with David Maxwell , chairman and chief executive officer , and Roger Birk , president and chief operating officer , on strategic planning . 
Mr. Johnson , 45 years old , has been a consultant on strategy to Fannie Mae for the past 3 1\/2 years . 
In an interview , he said Fannie Mae faces a number of challenges with the restructuring of the thrift industry and the push to broaden its activities overseas . 
`` There 's no shortage of major things to do , '' he said . 
Fannie Mae also said James A. Aliber , chairman of First Federal of Michigan and a director since 1985 , moved up the date of his retirement from the board to accommodate Mr. Johnson 's election as a director . 
The board has 13 members elected by holders and five presidential appointees . 
Fannie Mae , a federally chartered , shareholder-owned corporation , operates a secondary market for mortgage loans , buying loans from lenders , packaging some into securities for sale to investors and keeping the rest in its portfolio . 
`` The New Crowd '' by Judith Ramsey Ehrlich and Barry J. Rehfeld ( Little , Brown , 444 pages , $ 19.95 ) , describes the displacing of the old `` our crowd '' Jewish Wall Street banking grandees by such new business barons as Saul Steinberg , Carl Icahn , Sanford Weill and Bruce Wasserstein . 
Its many lively stories include the Gutfreund-Postel holiday cheer imbroglio . 
These two New Crowd families lived in the same apartment building , with the Postel penthouse perched on top of the Gutfreund duplex . 
The penthouse elevator started up from the Gutfreund landing , and Susan Gutfreund used to turn off its light , to give the impression that there was no higher floor . 
Eventually , Mr. Postel broke his toe in the dark . 
Then the Gutfreunds determined to put up a 22-foot Christmas tree , weighing a quarter of a ton , to amaze their holiday guests . 
For this , a crane needed to be mounted on the Postels ' terrace . 
The Postels did not give permission . 
But the Gutfreund workers went ahead anyway , only to be captured `` in flagrante '' by Joan Postel , who called the police . 
Before the Gutfreunds finally left this unfriendly environment for a prodigious duplex on Fifth Avenue and an 18th-century mansion with a specially excavated $ 1 million garage in Paris , the Postels had obtained an injunction to prevent any future hoisting of trees , and in a neighborly spirit hit both the Gutfreunds and the building with a $ 35 million lawsuit . 
Nothing less , it seemed , could console them for their traumas . 
Where had all the money come from ? 
The young John Gutfreund had been discovered by Billy Salomon of Salomon Bros. when he was still a bearded liberal , and put to work as a trader , and then as a rough-and-tumble syndicator . 
`` ` Get off your ... , ' he would bellow , '' say the authors . 
Rising in the firm , he became powerful and bland , though his new wife , Susan , made him shine in the gossip columns with her profligate spending habits and flamboyant frocks . 
After he had been head of the company for 3 1\/2 years , he and his partners sold it to Phibro , a powerful commodity trading outfit , for $ 550 million in Phibro stock . 
Limited partner Billy Salomon , whose family name had been on the firm 's door for 70 years and who had hoped it would be there forever , was not consulted . 
Mr. Gutfreund collected $ 32 million , while Billy Salomon got $ 10 million , much less than if he had conducted the sale . 
`` I felt betrayed , '' he later said . 
Worse , Salomon 's timing had been off . 
Its profits , unlike Phibro 's , soared over the next two years , and had it held out , Salomon could have gotten an even bigger bundle . 
The book also recounts the not dissimilar maneuvers surrounding the changing of the guard at Lehman Bros. and other grand old firms . 
Often the genteel , conservative , long-term-oriented investment bankers were displaced by crude traders : `` When angered , he cursed so forcefully that his face reddened and his pale-blue eyes narrowed into tiny slits , '' the authors say of Lehman 's Lewis Glucksman . 
The earlier generation of `` our crowd '' bankers -- Belmonts , Warburgs , Lehmans , Baches and Schiffs -- had stressed above all probity , tradition , continuity and reputation . 
They were old-fashioned elegant gentlemen , who happened to be of German Jewish extraction . 
But in the harsh world of today 's Wall Street they have lost out to more aggressive and sometimes less scrupulous successors . 
The cuckoo prefers the nests of other birds and heaves out their eggs . 
But the old guard hired the New Crowd people : It brought in its own cuckoos . 
So , as the Old Crowd toppled from the branch , it should n't have been too surprised . 
The old guard had every right , however , to disdain the newcomers ' new ways of making money , such as greenmail . 
( A Fortune article on Saul Steinberg was entitled , `` Fear and Loathing in the Corporate Boardrooms . '' ) 
Their other staple has been corporate takeovers , often hostile and financed by junk bonds . 
Hostile takeovers are quite a new phenomenon . 
Sometimes they are constructive , but often not . 
First , by making management focus on short-term results , they inhibit building for the future -- just the opposite of Japan . 
Second , a long-term shareholder of a good company need n't worry too much when the stock price drops temporarily : It will bounce back . 
But if a raider takes over when the stock is weak , the shareholder never gets his recovery . 
The raiders , meanwhile , have evolved their own pattern for spending their new millions . 
As described in `` The New Crowd , '' they take on ambitious new wives , move to Greenwich , Conn. , or Bedford , N.Y. , buy OK pictures , and let their wives share the wealth with decorators . 
Having donated heavily to museums , they demand a place on their boards . 
The book is patronizing about this nouveau riche struggle for respectability , which has its tawdry aspects . 
However , on balance , the charity game helps America . 
If those who have the money do n't get involved with the museums and the charities , then City Hall will do it , badly . 
It has been rightly observed that the main thing wrong with tainted money is , t' ai nt enough of it . 
A handful of the New Crowd operators have crossed the line from the immoral to the illegal , and have ended up in the slammer or paying huge fines : 
Ivan Boesky , Dennis Levine , Martin Siegel , Victor and Steven Posner , and now Michael Milken and perhaps Leona Helmsley . 
The glitzy office that Ivan Boesky vacated for a prison cell had previously contained commodity operators Marc Rich and `` Pinky '' Green , today fugitives from a potential century apiece of jail sentences . 
The Old Crowd is deeply concerned by the backlash from all this . 
However , the phenomenon is not specifically Jewish . 
It has always been true that those outside the club want to climb in , and that a few will cut corners in the process . 
Some pretty seamy stuff built the turn-of-the-century families ' Fifth Avenue and Newport palazzi and endowed their daughters ' weddings to foreign noblemen . 
Mr. Boesky was a piker compared to Jay Gould and Jim Fiske , and Commodore Vanderbilt thought nothing of bribing judges and legislators . 
So who knows ? 
In a generation or two some of the New Crowd may attain true respectability , perhaps to be displaced in turn by a later flock of unscrupulous raptors . 
Or perhaps Wall Street , when it has suffered enough , will realize that finance is a service industry , and change its ethos . 
Mr. Train is president of Train , Smith Investment Counsel , New York . 
Dallas investor Harold C. Simmons said he raised his stake in Lockheed Corp. to 10.62 % from 10.43 % of the aerospace and electronics concern 's common shares . 
In a Securities and Exchange Commission filing , Mr. Simmons said he and companies he controls , NL Industries Inc. and NL Chemicals Inc. , hold 6,744,600 shares of Lockheed , of Calabasas , Calif . 
They include 122,700 shares bought Friday for between $ 47.125 and $ 48 each . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Lockheed closed at $ 46.125 a share , down 12.5 cents . 
Earlier this week , Mr. Simmons objected to published reports quoting him as saying he planned to sell his Lockheed stake because `` the defense industry seems to be getting more uncertain . '' 
Valhi Inc. , another of Mr. Simmons ' companies , responded to an article Monday in The Wall Street Journal , which credited a story in the Sunday Los Angeles Daily News . 
Valhi said the articles did n't accurately reflect Valhi and its affiliates ' intentions toward Lockheed . 
Instead , Valhi said , they may increase , decrease or retain their Lockheed holdings , depending on a number of conditions . 
Canada , which is preparing to speed up tariff cuts with the U.S. , recorded a 47 % narrowing in its trade surplus with the U.S. in August , Statistics Canada , a federal agency , reported . 
U.S. exports to Canada jumped 11.2 % in August from July while U.S. imports from Canada rose only 2.7 % . 
As a result , Canada 's trade surplus with the U.S. narrowed to C$ 656.5 million ( US$ 558 million ) in August from C$ 1.23 billion ( US$ 1.04 billion ) in July . 
U.S. exports benefited in August from heavy Canadian spending on new plant and equipment and a pickup in Canadian auto demand , Canadian officials said . 
The U.S. and Canada , which do more trade than any other pair of nations , are to meet next month to arrange an acceleration of planned tariff cuts under the U.S.-Canada free trade agreement . 
Industries in both countries have requested a speedup of tariff cuts on hundreds of products . 
Some tariffs were eliminated when the trade pact took effect Jan. 1 . 
The remainder were to be phased out in five or 10 annual installments , with all tariffs eliminated by January 1998 . 
The two countries aim to reach an agreement by early December on a package of accelerated tariff cuts that would take effect early next year . 
Canadian officials said the trade pact has kindled an export interest among many small Canadian companies that previously had little or no foreign sales . 
For such businessmen , the Canadian government is organizing 55 missions this year to U.S. states bordering on Canada . 
The businessmen are introduced to potential agents and distributors and instructed in trade procedures . 
The U.S. Commerce Department is planning to try out similar trips on U.S. businessmen in coming months under its Canada First ! Outreach Program . 
Participants in the U.S. missions to Canada are to be assisted by members of the Service Corps of Retired Executives , a volunteer group , in dealing with their export challenges . 
The Canadian government also has recently opened new trade offices in San Diego ; San Juan , Puerto Rico ; Miami ; Princeton , N.J. , and Denver , bringing the total number of such Canadian offices in the U.S. to 27 . 
The U.S. has six trade promotion offices in Canada . 
Canada 's export effort has been blunted by robust home market demand and by an 18 % appreciation of the Canadian dollar against its U.S. counterpart in the past three years that has made Canadian goods more costly in the U.S. . 
Canada 's trade surplus with all countries narrowed to C$ 203.5 million in August from C$ 528.3 million in July , Statistics Canada said . 
Loral Corp. said it received a $ 325 million order from Turkey 's Ministry of Defense , the largest contract the company ever has received . 
Loral will provide to Turkey an electronic countermeasures system for its fleet of F-16 aircraft . 
The system provides radar-threat warning and electronic jamming capabilities . 
The defense electronics maker said delivery will begin in October 1991 and run through mid-1995 . 
Loral said the contract with Turkey will provide opportunities for Loral to supply that country with other defense systems . 
Crown Resources Corp. said it reached a definitive agreement to acquire the Gold Texas Resources Ltd. shares it does n't already own . 
Under the proposed agreement , Gold Texas holders will receive 1.43 Crown shares for each of the 1.1 million Gold Texas shares not owned by Crown , which already owns 65 % . 
The arrangement is subject to approval by the Supreme Court of British Columbia province , Crown said . 
Gold Texas is based in Vancouver , British Columbia , and Crown Resources is based in Denver . 
Both are mining concerns . 
Apogee Robotics Inc. said its board extended until Feb. 1 the exercise period of Apogee 's existing stock purchase warrants outstanding . 
The expiration date had been Nov. 3 . 
Each of the 1,075,000 warrants entitle the holders to purchase one share of Apogee common stock for $ 2.25 . 
Apogee was quoted in the over-the-counter market yesterday at $ 2 bid . 
Bank of New England Corp. , seeking to streamline its business after a year of weak earnings and mounting loan problems , said it will sell some operations and lay off 4 % of its work force . 
The bank holding company also reported that third-quarter profit dropped 41 % , to $ 42.7 million , or 61 cents a share , from the year-earlier $ 72.3 million , or $ 1.04 a share . 
Among its restructuring measures , the company said it plans to sell 53 of its 453 branch offices and to lay off 800 employees . 
Altogether , employment is expected to decline to less than 16,000 from the current level of about 18,000 . 
Walter Connolly , chairman , said in an interview that the company expects to record pretax gains of $ 100 million to $ 125 million from the sale of its leasing operations and of certain financial processing services . 
In a prepared statement , the company said it expects to realize those gains before year end . 
Nonperforming assets continued to pile up in the latest quarter , rising to $ 900 million , or 3.52 % of loans and leases , from $ 667 million , or 2.68 % , at the end of the second quarter . 
Some $ 170 million of the $ 233 million increase in nonperforming loans was related to real estate , and roughly three-quarters of that was in the troubled New England market , according to Richard Driscoll , vice chairman . 
Mr. Driscoll said that , despite continued weakness in the region 's real estate market , Bank of New England expects the rate of increase in nonperforming assets to slow in coming quarters . 
Mr. Connolly noted that net third-quarter charge-offs , at $ 63 million , improved slightly from the $ 67 million in the second quarter . 
And he indicated that more substantial improvement is expected in the next couple of quarters . 
The company increased its loan loss reserve to $ 354 million from $ 342 million at the end of the second quarter . 
Total assets slipped to $ 31.4 billion , from $ 32 billion as of June 30 . 
Among other restructuring measures , the bank said it will close its loan production offices in Chicago , New York and Philadelphia . 
The Chicago office figured prominently in the bank 's problems earlier this year , when $ 65 million in loans to Chicago businessman William Stoecker went sour . 
In an internal memorandum to employees , Messrs. Connolly and Driscoll described the restructuring as an effort to continue rationalizing operations assembled during a series of mergers over the past five years . 
Italy 's wholesale price index rose 0.4 % in August from July and was up 6.1 % from a year earlier , the state statistical institute reported . 
The index registered 196.1 in August , compared with 195.4 in July and with 184.9 in August 1988 . 
The year-on-year rise in August was slightly down from the 6.4 % rate in July . 
The index has a base of 100 set in 1980 and is n't seasonally adjusted . 
U.S. steel imports in August fell 14 % from a year earlier to 1,531,000 tons , according to the American Iron and Steel Institute . 
The trade group 's compilation of Commerce Department data showed that August imports , the second largest monthly total of the year , were up 5 % from July 's 1,458,000 tons but below last year 's high of 1,979,000 tons in June 1988 . 
August imports claimed 18.5 % of the U.S. market , compared with 19.3 % in July and 20.5 % in August 1988 . 
The latest month 's figures show that imports of steel from European Community nations fell to 466,000 tons from 481,000 a month earlier , while imports from Japan rose to 323,000 tons from 288,000 in July . 
Imports from Canada rose to 272,000 tons in August from 209,000 in July . 
The American Institute for Imported Steel said imports for the first eight months of 1989 were below the level allowed by the Voluntary Restraint Agreement program . 
The institute said that , excluding semifinished steel products , year-to-date imports represented 15.2 % of consumption , compared with a permitted maximum of 18.5 % . 
Japanese machinery makers received orders totaling 1.465 trillion yen ( $ 10.33 billion ) in August , up 14 % from a year earlier , the Economic Planning Agency said . 
`` Equipment orders on the domestic side were particularly strong in shipping and power utilities , '' said an agency official . 
The latest report compares with a modest 9.9 % increase in July machinery orders from a year earlier . 
In August , soon after Wang Laboratories Inc. reported a staggering $ 424.3 million loss and replaced its president , two Boston sales representatives sent customers a letter saying : `` We fully expect that you will soon be reading stories in the press reporting the ` Amazing Comeback at Wang . ' '' 
How soon Wang will stage a comeback , or if it will at all , are still matters of debate . 
But Wang salespeople are trying to cope with the biggest challenge any marketer can face : selling the products of a company that is on the ropes . 
`` If your prospect is feeling risk the whole time and you 're not feeling as if you 're backed up by a stable company , you 've lost it before you 've begun , '' says Mary Ann Cluggish , a Wellesley , Mass. , sales trainer and consultant who works with high technology companies . 
It can happen in any industry . 
Consider the difficulties faced by Audi salespeople when the car was tainted by false charges of sudden acceleration , or Exxon dealers ' problems in the wake of the Valdez oil spill . 
Like thousands of salespeople before them , Wang 's are finding ways to combat the bad news . 
`` It 's very important that we exude confidence , even though within the family we know there 's a lot of hard work ahead , '' said Richard Miller , the Lowell , Mass. , computer concern 's new president , in a video message to salespeople a month after he took over . 
Wang got into financial trouble because of bloated overhead and overly optimistic sales forecasts . 
Its mainline minicomputers and word processors have lost ground to cheaper personal computers . 
Last year it funded its high employment by heavy borrowing , and it suffered huge losses when sales turned down instead of rising . 
After the company reported red ink for the fiscal third quarter , Wang 's marketing department provided the sales force answers to questions such as `` How could you not have known you were going to lose $ 55 million ? '' and `` Is Wang still a viable company ? '' 
Salespeople try to push their products and avoid discussions of finances . 
Responding to such questions is `` defensive , '' says Kenneth Olissa , Wang 's vice president , marketing . 
`` That 's antithetical to the art of selling . '' 
Moreover , he notes that analyzing financial results `` poses a problem for a salesman who is n't particularly familiar with a balance sheet . '' 
At one sales strategy meeting , an executive suggested ordering salespeople to become experts on the annual report . 
Mr. Miller vetoed that : `` Even I ca n't understand all the footnotes , '' he says . 
Instead , he says , if the salespeople can get the customers to consider Wang 's products on their merits , he or a top financial officer will try to assuage the fears about finances . 
Mike Metschan , a salesman in Wang 's Austin , Texas , office , has a breezier method : `` We tell them $ 3 billion companies do n't go out of business . 
We tell them all the major companies are having financial difficulties . '' 
Numerous computer companies are having sales slumps and earnings declines , but very few have had losses comparable to Wang 's or are carrying such a large debt load . 
Mr. Miller says that after a sharp sales slump in July and August , sales stabilized in September . 
Although Wang will report a loss for the first quarter ended Sept. 30 and the full fiscal year , Mr. Miller says he expects the company will return to profitability by the fourth quarter . 
Experts on sales technique say anyone representing a troubled company must walk a fine line . 
`` If a salesman jeopardizes his credibility in this time of trouble , it will be a problem for the long run , '' says George Palmatier , a Minden , Nev. , sales consultant and author of `` The Marketing Edge . '' 
Still , says John Sullivan , a management recruiter with Daniel Roberts Inc. of Boston , who has held senior sales positions at Polaroid and Atari : `` The customer will react to strength . 
Ignore the present condition . 
Show it 's business as usual . '' 
That is n't easy . 
Wang 's customers are data processing managers who want to be sure that their suppliers are stable , wellrun companies that will be around to fix bugs and upgrade computers for years to come . 
For buyers , `` these are career-risking decisions , '' says Jean Conlin , who supervises a network of Wang computers in the admissions department at Boston University . 
The university is considering installing a $ 250,000 system to store applications electronically . 
`` Before the really bad news , we were looking at Wang fairly seriously , '' she says . 
But `` their present financial condition means I 'd have a hard time convincing the vice president in charge of purchasing . '' 
Ms. Conlin adds : `` At some point we 'd have to ask , ` How do we know that in three years you wo n't be in Chapter 11 ? ' '' 
During the past year , Wang has developed new products and a new strategy and hired a new president . 
Wang 's overall product line is `` still not as good as other vendors , but they 've come a long way , '' says Steven Wendler , a consultant with market researcher Gartner Group , Stamford , Conn . 
`` They were on the road to recovery in terms of customer attitudes until this bad quarter happened . '' 
The first priority for Wang 's sales force is to make sure it holds on to existing customers . 
Wang 's installed base is one of its greatest assets , and many of those customers remain extremely loyal . 
But even before Wang 's latest financial troubles surfaced , some customers `` were trying to wall off their Wang installations '' so other departments would n't add Wang , says Chris Christiansen , a former Wang marketer who is now a market analyst with Meta Group , a market research firm in Stamford , Conn . 
One Wang salesman who left the company in July recalls that when he tried to sell products to Eastman Kodak , he worked `` to muster support from internal allies , '' but `` those allies became skeptical as they saw the downtrend . 
The more recent losses were really devastating . '' 
New customers , the source of higher commissions for salespeople and the key to Wang 's long-term viability , are even tougher . 
Rick Lynch , a former top salesman in Wang 's Boston office , referring to Wang 's mainstay computer line , says : `` You ca n't sell a VS to a new customer . '' 
Mr. Lynch left Wang this summer for Oracle Systems Inc. , a software vendor . 
The financial problems are particularly frustrating for salespeople pushing Wang 's image systems , which convert paper forms to electronic documents . 
Consultants say that Wang 's technology is among the best available in the image market . 
But salespeople often found that news of Wang 's problems superseded their sales efforts . 
William Tait , a former sales manager in Indianapolis , says that his office had all but sold a $ 1.5 million image system to pharmaceutical maker Eli Lilly & Co . 
`` When they were making the decision , all hell broke loose with the finances . '' 
He says the Lilly executives told him they could n't take the risk with Wang . 
Mr. Tait say he does n't blame Lilly . 
Buyers have to rely on a supplier `` continually upgrading and replacing the product , '' he says . 
`` When a company realizes that , it 's hard to go with Wang . '' 
For Mr. Tait , who says he used to earn as much as $ 150,000 a year at Wang , it was one more reason to quit . 
He is now president of Eastate Homes Inc. , an Indianapolis contractor . 
It can be hard for a salesperson to fight off feelings of discouragement . 
Brian Petre , a former Wang salesman in upstate New York , says : `` You have pride in your job . 
You think you can go out and turn things around . 
It 's a tough thing when you ca n't . 
The reason does n't relate to your selling skills . '' 
Discouragement feeds on itself . 
`` The problem is , if people get down in the dumps , they stop selling , '' says Mike Durcan , a laid-off sales manager in Wang 's Austin office . 
One key for salespeople is to boost their own morale . 
Paul Hellman , a Framingham , Mass. , sales and management consultant and author of `` Ready , Aim , You 're Hired , '' says : `` The bad news is , you 'll be rejected more . 
The good news is , it 's not your fault . '' 
So , he advises , make goals achievable . 
For instance , he suggests that salespeople making telephone calls should say to themselves : `` All I want to do today is get 50 rejections . '' 
But Mr. Miller , Wang 's new president , recently warned his salespeople about negativism . 
`` Our customers watch us for the hidden message , '' he said . 
`` Look a customer right in the eye and say , ` I 'm glad to be at Wang . 
Blinder International Enterprises Inc. , the parent of beleaguered penny-stockbroker Blinder , Robinson & Co. , said its shareholders approved a previously announced name change to Intercontinental Enterprises Inc . 
`` The parent company is diversifying into other industries around the world , '' said president Meyer Blinder in explaining the name change . 
`` Everytime we talked about Blinder International , { people } thought it was the brokerage house . '' 
Mr. Blinder said the change was n't related to the brokerage 's recent troubles , which have included sharp declines in earnings , run-ins with the securities regulators and lawsuits by former customers . 
The company said it expects the name change to take effect within a week . 
Olin Corp. said third-quarter net income rose 26 % on the strength of its chemical business . 
Net was $ 24 million , or $ 1.15 a share , up from $ 19 million , or 90 cents a share , a year earlier . 
Sales rose 7.4 % to $ 580 million from $ 540 million . 
Olin said its chemical segment had profit of $ 22 million , up from $ 15 million a year ago , largely because of gains in electrochemicals such as caustic soda . 
The company said the gains were tied to volume increases and higher prices . 
The market for electrochemicals include the paper , water-purification and textile industries . 
The chemical segment had a $ 6 million gain on the sale of ammonia and urea businesses , which was offset by a $ 6 million charge for future environmental expenditures . 
Profit in Olin 's defense and ammunition segment rose to $ 8 million from $ 7 million . 
The metals segment , hurt by a strike , had break-even results , against $ 3 million a year ago . 
In the first nine months , net rose 21 % to $ 93 million , or $ 4.52 a share , from $ 77 million , or $ 3.62 a share a year ago . 
Sales rose 13 % to $ 1.91 billion from $ 1.69 billion . 
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading , Olin closed at $ 58.50 a share , down 25 cents . 
GTE Corp. and MCI Communications Corp. reported strong earnings gains to record levels for the third quarter . 
Southwestern Bell Corp. and Cincinnati Bell posted slight declines . 
GTE Corp . 
GTE said net income rose 18 % , aided by higher long-distance calling volumes and an increase in telephone lines in service . 
Pretax operating profit from telephone operations rose 8.2 % but profits from telecommunications products and electrical products were flat . 
Revenues rose 8.8 % to $ 4.35 billion from $ 4.0 billion . 
The company said the quarter included a 10 % increase in local-exchange usage for long-distance calling and a 5 % increase in the number of access lines in service . 
Earlier rate reductions in Texas and California reduced the quarter 's revenue and operating profit $ 55 million ; a year earlier , operating profit in telephone operations was reduced by a similar amount as a result of a provision for a reorganization . 
Revenue in the telecommunications products and services unit rose 27 % to $ 728.8 million , but operating profit was unchanged at $ 26.3 million , partly because of start-up expenses . 
Electrical products ' sales fell to $ 496.7 million from $ 504.5 million with higher world-wide lighting volume offset by lower domestic prices and the impact of weaker currencies in Europe and South America . 
Operating profit of $ 37.2 million was unchanged . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , GTE rose $ 1.25 to $ 64.125 . 
MCI Communications Corp . 
MCI , which stepped up efforts to sell long-distance telephone service to residential customers , reported a 59 % jump in earnings . 
Revenue rose 23 % to $ 1.67 billion from $ 1.36 billion . 
Operating profit grew 57 % to $ 269 million from $ 171 million , while operating margins rose to 16.1 % from 15.9 % the previous quarter and 12.6 % a year ago . 
Daniel Akerson , MCI chief financial officer , said the company sees further improvements in operating margins . 
`` We think we can take it to the 18 % range over next 18 to 24 months , '' he said . 
In national over-the-counter trading , MCI fell $ 2.625 to $ 42.375 . 
Charles Schellke , an analyst with Smith Barney , Harris Upham & Co. , said some investors apparently expected slightly better revenue growth . 
The company said that residential traffic grew faster than business traffic and attributed that to its new PrimeTime calling plan that competes with American Telephone & Telegraph 's Reach Out America plan . 
MCI claims about 12 % of the overall long-distance telephone market but just under 10 % of the $ 23 billion residential market . 
It has been trying to improve its share of the residential market . 
The company wants its business mix to more closely match that of AT&T -- a step it says will help prevent cross subsidization . 
Mr. Akerson said MCI recorded `` another solid cash positive quarter , '' its fourth in a row , but declined to comment on whether the company is considering a dividend or is planning any acquisition . 
The current quarter , he said , `` looks fine . 
We think revenue will continue to grow and that we can control costs and thus improve profitability . '' 
Southwestern Bell Corp . 
Southwestern Bell Corp. said net dropped 8.7 % , mainly the result of four extraordinary items : a franchise tax refund that its Southwestern Bell Telephone Co. unit received last year ; a production shift of several Yellow Pages directories to the fourth quarter from the third ; a rate refund in Missouri and a one-time adjustment to phone company revenues . 
Revenue slipped 1.2 % to $ 2.21 billion from $ 2.23 billion . 
The earnings drop had been expected . 
Chairman Zane E. Barnes said Southwestern Bell 's `` businesses are healthy and are continuing to grow . '' 
The company reported a 3.1 % increase in the number of access lines in service , and also said its Southwestern Bell Mobile Systems unit added 30,000 new customers , with a current total of about 333,000 . 
Southwestern shares fell 50 cents to $ 55.875 in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange . 
Cincinnati Bell Inc . 
Cincinnati Bell Inc. said net declined 1.8 % . 
The company noted that the year-ago period was particularly strong , with an increase of nearly 70 % . 
Revenue jumped nearly 17 % to $ 223.3 million from $ 191.4 million . 
In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange , Cincinnati Bell fell 25 cents to $ 29 . 
The company said that the number of access lines dropped slightly in the quarter , a decline attributed to seasonal fluctuations . 
For the year , however , access lines in service have increased 5.5 % . 
Chairman D.H. Hibbard said the company has set a new five year goal of doubling revenues to about $ 1.8 billion while steadily increasing net . 
